**There's a TL;DR: at the bottom. Everything else is optional leisure shit talk for your Sunday newspaper reading pleasure.**

 If you do decide to engage in these 50 pages though, I'm putting 4 years worth of Ivy League Undergraduate Psychology (~$250,000) for free here, minus the bullshit. Grab some hot cocoa, because it's gonna be a long one. Also, if you know someone interested in Psych, but not actually interested in advancing Psych Research, probably just have them read this instead of getting a Psych degree.  Chances are, your buddy doesn't actually want to know psychology, they just want to know more about their mental issues and how to address them. *You'll find everything (outside of niche conditions) in Psychology that is 1) worth mentioning +  2) that is universally applicable to everyone, alluded to here.*

 Shout out to Dr. K, Andrew Huberman, and Scott Barry Kaufman, these are the giant shoulders I lean on. Much of the information here is practically word for word from them. No need to reinvent the wheel here.

 What to expect from this: A deep-dive into what Enlightenment is and how Enlightenment is reached. What you won't find here is practical advice, I don't give you actual meditative practices to try out. But I do tell you what the path to Enlightenment looks like. If you have a basic understanding of what this path looks like then you can carve your own way to Self-Actualization, and even beyond that, Self-Transcendence. "I didn't change your life. You changed your life. You actually changed. You took the action. You changed your thought process. You changed your mindset. You change your mind. We may have assisted in help and gave you some clarity but none of my books tell you what to do. Your whole life people been teling you what to do. Psychology is about doing what *you* do...What lights your fire. What gives you clarity up in here. And nobody can give you that. They can explain it: how other individuals do it. But you still have to add." ~Tim Grover

 Disclaimer: Don't trust me. I could be wrong. Don't take anything here for granted. In fact likely most things in here is wrong. But things do not need to be right for you to try them and see if it works for you. Do your own research and come to your own conclusions. All of the knowledge I have gained is not correlated with reality. The knowledge is just correlated with my own real experiences. But remember this lesson from dreams, just because you really experienced it, it doesn't mean it aligns with reality. Science may never advance to a point where we know what is right. But we don't need science or facts here. Enlightenment is all about a way of describing a particular type of subjective experience. Something does not need to be right for it to be a subjective truth; Feelings don't care about facts. In this dimension, the only things you can truly know is to do it yourself, to experience. You won't know if you like bananas until you yourself have eaten bananas. So, you see for yourself if the knowledge here matches with your real experiences. ~ADIO

 Intro Blurb. Don't sleep on the East. 

 The mind and body are one, and this phenomenon is called Soul (or what Descartes mistakenly called mind.) Your relationship with your soul has the largest effect on how your nervous system operates, fourth only to breathing (which is not only a requirement to life but also has reverberating effects on the whole mind and body, the whole nervous system), and sunlight viewing behavior (because syncing of the harmonic rhythm of all your organs to your circadian clock reduces the otherwise resultant traffic jam cacophony, and when tuned well will automatically level your up your intimacy with your soul,) and diet (Every cell runs on glucose whether you like it or not.) Anything else than those 3 pales in comparison to soul. And if you think you can list something more impactful, it's only cause you're some sort of optimization freak, you probably join cults that have doctored you to think you can do things like improve your vision. Your relationship to your soul was evolved for survival, not evolved to be happy, so the nature of your relationship to your soul will affect your internal response to all things external. Look, you science worshippers and ayurveda doubters (ya'll know who), their insight into the 3 doshic categories (kapha, vata, pitta) is a heuristic pointing to a fact of human life. If you're some shade of down depressed, that's the equivalent of communicating to your body to stop stop stop, conserve energy, chances of cultivating resources in your environment is low, so find a place where you can keep a low profile and rest alone as you hope the danger passes you by. If you're some shade of energetic and anxious, that's the equivalent of communicating to your body to stay ready to go go go and run to forage and find food. If you're some shade of straightforwardness and anger, that's the equivalent of communicating to your body that if we engage in competition now, we are going to get the good stuff we need to survive. Which of these 3 modes you tend towards (freeze, flight, or fight) will in turn bias the type of neurochemical information being sent from brain to body that informs how your body should respond to nutrients, and how your body should prepare itself physically to enhance ones reproductive fitness. Sure, you can override these effects with excessive dieting (because what your body can do is limited by what's available to use), or with forced physical activity (because your body will force itself to make metabolic arrangements for what you actually end up doing). But outside of weirdos that do that kind of stuff, Soul is #4 on the list of huge body impact. And Meditation is about increasing your chances of unlocking a 4th mode in response to conflict, the calm and connect mode. Spiritual growth influences everything, from how you move to how you breathe to whether you even decide to spend time engaging in the deliberation of picking up a diet change or exercise regime or healthy sleep or how you socially interact. Anyways, this will be a deep dive into the one scientifically verified treatment, that is not placebo, that actually affects all mental illnesses, and has verifiable mild to moderate benefits for all people.

 Adding Context before we get to actual content: The difference between Western meditation and Eastern meditation

 The goal of meditation is moksha (enlightenment). It's kind of weird but in western society no-one talks about enlightenment. Buddha didn't teach meditation so that you can have an empty mind. He was teaching meditation so you can be liberated. Somewhere along the way in the 60s there were scientists who learned meditation. The era of Transcendental meditation, the birth of the yogic hippy and groovy drugs. This lead to an interest in meditation, and then people got interested in the science, the studying of it. This is where we get the birth of mindfulness, people talk about mindfulness a lot but not meditation. Researchers tried to find the common element, which is difficult because there's a diverse range of practices, and lot of weird cultish stuff associated with meditation. They tried to remove the latter part, standardize it and protocolize it, and in doing so actually removed the spiritual part out of meditation. So they gave you the fast food version of meditation. Mindfulness is the McNugget of meditation. A uniformed thing that is not equally appropriate for everyone. In addition, the protocolization made the goal of meditation mindfulness but the goal of mindfulness is actually mindlessness. So essentially is like taking bread, pasta, naan, and rice, finding a way to categorize it: carbohydrates. Studying carbohydrates, and then feeding you a tube of carbohydrates through mindfulness or apps (by the way, Fuck protein bars).

 The west has issues becauses we have a proprogation of meditation resources without meditation teachers. Now, not to say eastern society necessarily gets it right about meditation either. Many meditation teachers are not good. The reason is, meditation teachers are taught in one tradition. You become a certified meditation teacher by going to a particular person, you learn their particular branch of meditation. Any student that comes to this meditation teacher, they say "this is THE way to meditate". And if the teacher says this is THE way to meditate but it is not suitable for your cognitive fingerprint. Then the student walks away thinking, "I suck at meditation and meditation is not for me. Because look at this tibetan monk who's an expert on meditation. Yet, it didn't work for me." It not working does not mean you are bad at meditation, it just means that this particular meditation is not currently suitable for you.

 The not so interesting history of how Mindfulness is like less than 1% of meditation. Theoretically, origins of meditation starts with tantrics, guy named Shiva. His followers became tantrics. The tantrics then discovered yoga and became the yogis. They split into 4 subclasses. One of them was Raja Yoga, the King's path, or the path of willpower (Ahdanya yoga). Buddha's teachers were Ashdanya yogis. Buddha learn Ashdanya yoga and started teaching. Buddha's teaching's divided into three branches. Vrajayana Buddhism is like tantric buddhism. Theravada Buddhism are as close to Buddha's teaching as possible. Mahayana Buddhism: there are a lot of enlightened teachers, so get wisdom from people other than Buddha as well. Within Mahayana tradition we have Zen, within Zen we have mindfulness. The main takeaway, So, mindfulness is a subset of a subset of a subset in the world of meditation.

 What is mindfulness? In sanskrit, Sakshi Bhav (witnessing attitude). There are practices seeped in Cultivating your witnessing attitude. If I can observe this, this is not what I am. Theoretically, I could lose my hand and I'd still be me. Similar process with mind: I can look at my mind, and see the mind fluctuate. I can't really be anger and I can't really be sad. I am the thing that experiences anger or sadness or thoughts. I am not an action-taker, I take action. So what is I? The further back you go with this logic the more you get to the witnessing attitude. This is what you practice doing during mindfulness meditation.
 
 Dissecting the 2 components of consciousness and why Mindfulness is an enlightenment approximate - It is a state of consciousness. Mindfulness is an introduction to a spectrum of high conscious no mind states. Mindfulness is where you merely dip your toes and get a feel for how the enlightenment pool feels like. One heuristic Hinduism provides for us to think about different states of consciousness is a 2 axis spectrum of states. One axis alternates between high mind/thought activity to none, no mind activity. The other axis is high awareness to no awareness. For example, when there's No mind activity, No awareness = Deep sleep. Other example, when there's High mind activity, High awareness = your average waking day (or a really lucid dream). In between, high mind activity with little-to-no awareness = dreaming/daydreaming. As for Mindfulness? it is high awareness and really close to no mind activity. The enlightenment state is an extremly conscious mind, the highest awareness, and by having no mind activity, this allows for the highest possible levels of experiencing life. In Hinduism, mindfulness is called, Sakshi Bhav (witnessing attitude/mindfulness) it is a lower level state, and is a state when the observer exists with mental activity, and/or the state of watching things, aka the state that many scientists mistakenly believe is a "no-mind" state. Traditionally, practicing the mindfulness state was not because people wanted to be mindful, it was because this is one of many ways to prepare yourself to be mindless, to enter the mindlessness state, the first actual state of Enlightenment, Dhyana - the state of consciousness that is truly a no mind state, a mindless state. The mindless state is different from the mindfulness state that scientists mistaken for "no-mind", because in the mindfulness's "no-mind" state your mind is still being allocated towards watching/witnessing rather than being. 
 
 Enlightenment is a continuous spectrum of different mindlessness levels - In the actual no mind state of Dhyana, you're actually mindless, a pure awareness, the observer actually melds with the object of observation. And there's a whole list of jargon you don't need to know that refer to deeper states, further steps, of enlightenment like Nirbija Samadhi, Bija Samadhi, Samadhi, Moksha (The terms people use to describe enlightenment varies wildly but it doesn't matter too much. [If you really want to know, the various points on the axis are: 1) A waking up from the ego=not be distracted from things not you. 2) A waking to the awake awareness=meeting and recognizing yourself. 3) Waking as the awareness and aliveness=gaining familiarity with self. 4) Waking in the awareness and aliveness=comfortable familiarity with self. 5) Waking out to create and relate=Ready to strengthen the connection between ourselves and our universe. Comes with "spacious awareness" a little more boundless feeling, a little more open mind, open heart, awe, and literally more panoramic vision.]) The main idea behind this spectrum of terms is that your spiritual growth can continuously be improved. At the upper echelons of enlightenment, there isn't really an end because it's something you continuously hone. At the top, you reach Samadhi = temporarily feel enlightened. Beyond that, Hypothetically, beyond temporary enlightement is of course, being permanently enlightenment = Moksha. In this state of Moksha, is when that observer becomes your most constant and grounded self. In this state, What happens is that your life becomes a movie. Not in a depersonalized type way though. In a very personalized type way. It's a lot to take in, so if you're lost, don't worry, it's all a part of the process, we're not here to train your mind's ability to do mental gymnastics, we're here to cultivate your capacity for awareness. Later on we'll dive deeper into this idea of the observer melding with the object of observation, and this idea of your life becoming a personalized movie.

 From a science perspective, there's a very basic way of thinking about consciousness. At its core it is sentience, the susceptibility to sensation. The more conscious you are, the more sentient you are, and therefore more susceptible to sensation. There are many ways to catagorize different sensations/experiences, here's one way: sensation, perception, feeling/emotion, thought/metathought, behavior/action. There are the 5 ways we interact with life. First, the things that you will feel nonnegotiably: intereoception (internal), extereoception (external), proprioception (space/self-location). Second, where you focus your attention will directly direct your experience (via your mental attentional spotlight but also something as simple as which way you are facing.) Third, Your energy levels, your level of autonomic arousal, in combination with the context we are in and the demands we are facing, will flavor your experience. Fourth, The way you conceptually organize what is happening within and external to us will affect the way you feel about your experience. The way you interpret the way you conceptually organize will too affect the way we digest our experience, since we have the ability, to witness from a distance, to meta-perceive our thoughts, feelings and sensations. Finally, the reflexive or deliberate behaviors we engage in actively influence the environment of what future sensations arise by changing what is happening behind the scenes in various types of non-conscious processes (there is no mind-body dichotomy, all mental (non)activity are physical and have physical impact, all physical (non)activity are mental and have mental impact). How does this relate to enlightenment? Well generally those who are less susceptible to sensation, and therefore less conscious about their experience, tend to push down the experience for it come back later with a vengeance. Kind of like sleeping in a bad position and when you regain consciousness, when you wake up, suddenly feeling sore. Not to say that this is a bad thing, sometimes you need to put things away because they're too much to handle for you right now. However, do note that these things weigh you down over time. Those that are more susceptible to experiencing sensation (sensation, perception, feeling, thought or behavior), are better at digesting experience, and therefore rather than letting more and more pressure live with them rent-free like champange bottles, they instead let things pass through them without a fight, peacefully. Not being conscious creates a fight within, a disconnect. Back to the bad sleeping position example where you weren't mentally aware of your bad sleeping position, but your body felt it. (Note: not to say that just because you aren't currently aware of an experience that you didn't have conscious experiences, think Multiple Personality Disorder where there's multiple streams of consciousness, or dreams wehre you have an unconscious conscious experience, or anesthesia amnesia, or split-brain patients, or other content, systems and parts of the body that entail conscious experience but don't enter the conscious stream communicated to you. But for our purposes we only care about the conscious experiences that are communicated to you.) Your mind will to try to convince you you're fine because now you're well rested. Your body will convince you that you're not fine and to treat your body better. So, who's right, your mind or your body? The trick here, there is no conflict here. You're not fine and you're not not fine. You're just well rested and sore. You just acknowledge both sides of the argument (don't add more layers to the argument!), and you feel how they make you feel, and then move on. To be more conscious, to be more sentient, is to experience experiences as they come. To have felt experiences simplifies things and makes you run more efficiently. Consciousness is a fundamental feature of the universe. We're not beings with higher consciousness than other animals. Sure, we can have conscious experiences that they can't but we're equally conscious. The only difference between us and other conscious beings is that we have the capability to complicate things (and therefore do cool things like create technology). And we often make very simple, ordinary things more complicated than they actually are, the worst part is that we don't even recognize it! For example, many people think they feel fine. Fine isn't an actual feeling, it's just a way of describing how things are going for you. You can feel content, adjusted to your situation, relieved, but you can't feel fine. You can only feel what you feel. Feeling fine is an umbrella term, it paints a broad picture, and opens you up to not exploring its contents. Everytime you tell yourself you're feeling fine, you're ignoring what you actually feel on a fundamental level. You're experiencing less. 

 Start of the actual content: Describing Enlightenment and other enlightenment approximates

 What is enlightenment? It is not a state where you are permanently happy. Enlightenment is not an emotion. Enlightenment is a state of peace or contentment but not an emotion. It is peace in despite of sadness or happiness. People who are enlightened gain detachment from their emotions, you still experience emotions, they just don't bother you as much. And this axis runs perpendicular to the emotion axis. On the other end of this axis is suffering. So, there are people that suffer despite feeling enjoyment or sadness. That is, You can have a lot of positive emotion, a lot of enjoyment, you're not feeling sad, but there's a cosmic sense of suffering, like your life feels empty. This axis of enlightenment and suffering is independent of the axis emotion, because emotions are fluctuations of the mind. For example, you don't (at least hopefully) feel sad forever. You feel sad when something bad happens and your mind equilibrates over time. And similarly, you don't feel excited forever. The weird thing is when you are enlightened, even sadness is enjoyable. There is contentment despite feeling sad. Think about this. Do you enjoy listening to sad music? Do you enjoy watching sad movies? When you listen to sad music, how do you feel? Do you feel joyous? You feel sad/hurt but you enjoy it. How does that work? What is the difference between feeling sad and can enjoying listening to sad music/watching movie, but you feel sad and you don't enjoy it in your real life? The difference is the detachment in the former. It is not your life. This illustrates the idea of enlightenment. When you become enlightened, it's like your life becomes a movie. Where you can start to appreciate all the negative things. Does that suck? absolutely. Do I feel for you? absolutely. But there's this overwhelming contentment or peace. Because what's the difference between your life and a movie? It's that separation between you being in it, and you enjoying the feeling of it and yet detached to it (not in a depersonalized way though because when enlightened you are still engaging the movie as an actor, as opposed to being disengaged as an audience member.) How do you self-transcend into this life-as-a-movie state? Anytime you find something that helps you dissolve a part of your ego, you self-transcend a little. Before I divide into that though, I will tell you what it won't look like as well as insight into how the underlying mechanisms of your mind function.
 You can see this concept of detachment in other places as well, like a breakup. It feels bad when you go through it. Later on you start saying weird things, "Oh, man, I'm so glad that relationship ended. It hurt, but I feel so much better now. I still miss them but it was the right thing." A difference between when you are in the middle of it and when you process. This process of going from the former to the latter is the goal of meditation. The process of going from not enlightened to enlightened is Vairagya. When you become mindful, you start this journey of engaging with the previously mentioned subsequent states of mind, the states of mind that come with ego dissolution. Later on, I will describe how this process of ego dissolution is also the process of self-actualization, because dissolving your ego puts you in touch with your truest and best version of yourself. I will talk about how the process of self-actualization is also the process of self-transcendence, because dissolving your ego  effectively clears the debris that was blocking the connection between the observer and the observation. I will also provide more insight into how self-transcendence feels like if it isn't clear already.

 Flow sidenote: Similar on the spectrum is flow state where there is not a whole lot of mind, a little mind there that is one-pointed/kind of absorbed in the mental activity, that is fully focused/engaged on what we already know how to do, and is a high conscious state. A state where the self and the mind kind of become one, because our sense of interoception and extereoception suits our goals perfectly and it just feels right. Flow is a state where the sense of self melds with the activity of observation, thanks to our brain-body's ability to figure out what needs to be handled here and peeling away all the irrelevant stuff from our attention. What makes flow state different from Enlightenment is that being fully focused is not a requirement for Enlightenment because Enlightenment is where the observer-self melds with observation regardless of whether our mind is in sync with desired-task or whether it is doing whatever off-task activity the mind pleases. (Essentially, Enlightenment applies to more situations than flow does.) What flow state is specifically, is an expression of what we already know how to do. Flow is not a state for making errors/learning (well sort of, because you can have a bout of learning where you are making errors and learning but it doesn't come with a strong enough sense of error to deter you from your state of full focus.) That sense of error, that sense of agitation, is the highlight mark that is an expression of what don't know how to do yet. That sense of agitation, is really a sense of pain, and what pain does for us is highlights areas of your brain for change. This highlighting is important for neural plasticity, which is the changing of connections in the brain aka learning. So, flow state is the state of being highly engaged, as opposed to the state of agitation to engage the highlighting of brain connections for change aka learning, and thus a state which often lends itself to a sense of just being, and thus a sense of detachment. The difference, you can be in a state of enlightenment (which if you remember, is essentially maximum detachment but, not in a depersonalized way, in a very personalized-self-expansive-melding way that you can be in,) even if you are in a state of agitation/learning. But you basically aren't in a state of flow if you are activating the learning centers of your brain via agitation, because flow is the expression of connections in the brain that you are very familiar expressing. (Sidentoe: There's two forms of flow. Absorbed which is more focused/concentrated and after the task you realize much more time passed than how much time you feel like passed even though you feel like your sense of time was intact. Panoramic which is more like being in the now, very present focused but in a you lose sense of time type of way, can be absorbed too but more aware of everything around, which feels like you are aware from an open interconnected space.) To be clear, there's often an in and out with flow, so it is suitable for learning, it's just not for learning. This state of focus and narrow context setting (i.e., the peeling of irrelevant information) allows people to experience deeper satisfaction, learning, growth, and neuroplasticity. 

 Psychedelics - Why did drugs and meditation and hippies come together? Because psychedelics can come with ego dissolution which can move you towards enlightenment. People that take psychedelics often talk about separating from their life. For example, psychedelic therapy can be useful for people with PTSD. What happens is that a traumatic event and/or traumatic experience that shapes your personality and the way your neurons are wired. Essentially, you get trapped within your own mind. You get so stuck in that traumatic experience. For example, if you have a fear of abandonment. You are so concerned about being abandoned, "I'm going to be abandoned. I'm going to be abandoned." Someone with those type of thoughts is that they're in it. "I am." What the psychedelics might do is remove them from being in it, removing I'm. And combining it with therapy, the goal is to have them step outside of their fear of being abandonment, "I have a fear of abandonment." Going from I am to I have, and suddenly the fear of abandonment is outside of you. It's not you, in the same way your hand is not you. It's not "I am in pain" it's "my arthritis is acting up." Training the mind to notice that their mind runs programs like the abandoment.exe program, or the in_pain.exe program. And fostering understanding that your mind can do whatever it wants down there, and that you are up here. That when your mind activates certain modes/programs, it manifests in a bunch of weird ways because you don't understand it. Understanding what happens when you feel x y or z, and how it impacts all of your interactions. Once you become aware of its existence, that allows you to every now and then use 'detection', to see if .exe program is acting up again. Improving your detection level is important. The problem is all these things such as the fear of abandonment, they're like invisible, all cloaked, you can't detect them, you're just living your life and there's some invisible psychological thing beating the crap out of you. You can sort of come up with makeshift ways of handling it, but until you really make visible what's invisible it'll just continue doing its thing. Once its visible, you can start cultivating detachment from it.

 Psychedelics part 2 - All psychedelics do is activate your existing brain. Substances don't change what your brain can do, it just turns it on in a particular way (that may lead to very traumatizing psychedelic trips and/or psychosis that is life-threatening to you or your surroundings). So, theoretically anything anything that can be done with a psychedelic can be done without it (theoretically, reality may not be true.) Like if you look at marijuana we have endogenous cannabinoids. If you feel euphoric and chill when using marijuana, you can also experience that without marijuana. The brain has to be able to have that experience in order for you to have it. Although the one thing the brain can't do without marijuana is give you moobies (because it contains unidentified chemicals that promote aromatase activity which converts testosterone to estrogen.) Stay away from drugs friends they cause some really crazy shit you wouldn't expect till it's too late.

 Ego Death; The epitomy of spiritual experiences: the Out-of-body and the Near-Death experiences. When people experience one or both of these things, they are often life-changing and even personality-changing. How do they work? Yep, you guessed it; Ego Dissolution. In a sense, even without having a near-death experience, dissolving your ego is like killing a part of your self off because everything that can be described as identity is also ego. Humans are social beings. Most of our evolutionary advancement is due to our ability to form identities, which in turn also had the side effect of us being able to entangle with the world in much more complex ways. The Default Mode Network (DMN) is our part of the brain that is responsible for our ability to have a Social Identity, an extremly abstract and complex skill. Not to say that that is DMN's function, the DMN's main role is to provide communications between different parts of the brain and therefore fostering very interesting connections, that is, to associate things with other things. Our improved ability to form brain-area connections is why we can engage in abstract things like Social Identity and fulfill our role in our society to advance Human's reproductive success, and why we can engage in things like increasingly advancing technology. Now, to be clear, there isn't a part of the brain that is Ego. Ego is just a way to refer to the things that build us up in an inflationary way, a way that drives us so strongly that it feels like we feel more powerful but despite how good it makes us feel our confidence does not go up with it. Ego at its highest levels is Narcissism, when people appear to be full of themself but deep inside they are not confident in who they are and they function in a way that is so out of tune with their internal sense of confidence that they may not even realize their own lack of self-confidence. To be clear, being full of yourself, being narcissitic, does not have to look like fake-confidence, nor arrogance, it just has to be making it about you (especially if it's something that isn't necessarily about you.) “I’m saying your extreme rejection of and hatred for yourself is narcissism. Normal people aren’t that interested in themselves.” ~Dobu from Odd Taxi. Ego is the opposite of astute confidence. It is the opposite of our ability to be confident in the face of uncertainty, in the face of possible failure, to put our best foot forward and recognize that is all we can do. Ego is putting everything on the line as if it is do or die, to act as if our desired outcome will happen no matter what or we die trying. Specifically, Ego refers to all the human phenomenon that has a very adaptive function and served our evolution well, but may be hindering us in ways that hurt us on a spiritual level, in maldaptive ways that make us feel suffering rather than contentment. Because if our needs are met, we don't need to hold onto such archaic mechanisms, and it just feels so nourishing when we don't. A large part of Ego is our sense of identity, and during such experiences of Ego Death, out-of-body or near-death or other, it completely smashes all things Ego, including the identity. This is why people's personality change after such experiences (not always for the better, looking at you Hitler & Thanos.) When you are on the verge of dying, your body is put at the very highest levels of enlightenment because there is no need to rely on all the things DMN serves us such as Social Identity or connection formation. This is our last few moments of life, and when the DMN's volume levels are at levels of serenity, near-zero levels, there's no wonder why we may relive our life in those few moments because when all those connections that were distracting us before are no longer activated, then the deepest and most subconscious parts of ourself can come out. In a very similar sense, those who are extremly devoted, not necessarily in a religious way, when studied have found that the devotees well-practiced in prayer and faith, that if they were to pray, they not only turn off their DMN (well more accurately, make the DMN focused solely on the felt experience) but they turn off their sense of physical self. Their proprioception, (in particular, the brain regions associated with) their sense of location actually gets very inhibited. Which in turn creates a very unique sensation, an out-of-body experience. Some people report their experience is akin to seeing themself from a bird's-eye view. In addition, while praying and being faithful, you're making a conscious effort to focus on one thing and one thing only, which drowns out all other thought-bubbles or emotions that may arise (providing some insight as to why some people self-harm, where you just focus on one particular sensation during self-harm. There are other reasons people may self-harm, namely control.) This should put into perspective why devotion, especially religious ones, has had such a strangle hold on the world. When you are devoted in one-direction, it suppresses all of the evolutionary-adapative mechanisms that causes us suffering, and it actually gives us a sense of spiritual contentment, an empowerment, towards whatever it is that we are devoted to. Devotion and Ego-Death are highly tied together, such that, both phenomenon completely simplifies the way our brain functions neural-electrochemically by favoring a neural environment accustomed to producing tremendously less mental noise diversity, and thereby making the leftover neural signals front and center of our attention. (Well not always, sometimes the sense of self gets "destroyed" through expansion because there's a high entropy state of the mind, so like massive amounts of connectivity is happening, where the sense of self gets disorganized and diffuse. Which can be a traumatic experience, as this disorganization can leave your sense of self feeling shattered, the sense of self that was once low entropic and very simple, is now leaving you feeling uncertain, can't make sense of things, and out of it as if you entered an abyss. On the other hand, this diffusion kind of helps with feeling a sense of connectedness to things that are not you, and therefore be a spiritually uplifting experience. Psychedelics tend to cause ego-dissolution through ego-death and/or ego-diffusion. This process of all this connectivity happening can cause PTSD, and often requires some form of self-development and processing after. So, stay away from drugs, or at the very least don't do them in unsafe environments or around people you don't trust your life with. You want to be prepared to digest whatever RNG gives you.)

 Duality Transcendence: One focus of meditation is to sit with duality. To acknowledge that things can Coexist. That just because there's two very opposite extremes of describing something, that does not mean that one of them has to be true and the other not true. They are both true and they are both false. One of the things gurus teach you about is the folly of language: that is, the difference between things with quality and things without quality. Quality refers to that which can be described: descriptions, the ego, identities (such as Doctor/Weeaboo), scientific facts. Therefore things without quality are the things that cannot be described, most notably, enlightenment or extremely abstract concepts like dimensions beyond the 3rd. More specifically, descriptions are useful ways to help others understand what thing you are referring to, but at the same time, descriptions are far from accurately describing the thing you are referring. That things are not opposites. Things are not good or bad. Holy and Evil are just reasoning mechanisms separate from the thing itself. A form of pro vs con, where good is pro-societal and bad is anti-societal. Things are neither bitter or sweet. Think about this, How to describe the taste of a strawberry? A strawberry isn't sweet bitter or sour. It is what it is. A strawberry doesn't taste sweet bitter or sour, it taste like a strawberry. Those descriptors are just ways to approximate the taste of a strawberry, but you could never put into words how a strawberry tastes. You could never put into words what active focus looks and feels like. Descriptors are concepts of the mind that are not true to what things actually are. You may save lives by doctoring, but you're not a doctor, you're just you. Not to say descriptors are useless. When describing something, the people who know will know what you mean. But don't get it twisted, just because people understand what you mean, that does not mean that your descriptions actually accurately depicts the thing you are trying to describe. Descriptions have a strong potential of distracting you from seeing things for their true identity; Things are simply what things are. Anytihng more is just mental constructions laid on on top of reality. 
 
 One focus of meditation is to cultivate your ability to respond. Mental constructions are valid, whether they come as emotions or thoughts or some other form. The tricky thing about mental constructions is that the stronger the constructions are, the more you think it is reality, when in actuality, the less likely it is to be real. For example, as you become more angry, your perception of reality gets more distorted the more angry you feel, but if you talk to someone that's angry you will likely find that they think their mind is 100% accurate. This is a really tricky and problematic mental phenomenon where the more distorted our perceptions are the more convinced we are our perceptions are correct. What you need to recognize is that your mind-body will just generate all types of feelings, responding to the environment as it should. Your mind-body is a feeling-generating machine. The thoughts, emotions and other feelings are generated from all types of random stuff. Like, if you see a kangaroo in the street, you're just going to have a lot of kangaroo-related thoughts and emotions. These feelings are valid, and you're not responsible for these feelings arising because you were just going down the street and there just happened to be a kangaroo. Like not only is the circumstances out of your control, but what feelings arise are out of your control. You're not responsible for your feelings, not for what your mind generates. What you are responsible for is how you respond to your feelings, how you act in response to things your mind generates. The main mechanism for gaining power in how you respond will involve a combination of noticing, detaching from, and digesting. These three things empower you to respond to the world as you choose. To choose to cultivate feelings in a particular direction. You can't choose what feelings arise, but you can choose to build towards a direction that changes the likelihood of which feelings arise. 

 As mentioned, one focus of meditation is to train yourself in experiencing, to be in tune with your experience, to digest sensations, however do note this following distinction. Elemental (emotion personified) vs someone who elements. There is value in being in touch with the brain and body but not necessarily unifying the brain and body. When you unify the brain and body you become an elemental, you become whatever you are feeling personified. Many negative effects on people's lives or others are due to people being unable to regulate their mind when they have high levels of adrenaline in their body. So they become like an anger elemental or an anxiety elemental, anger-personified/anxiety-personified. Decoupling what you feel in the body from the brain allows you to become someone who can choose to engage in a feeling or not, one who elements, rather than one who becomes an elemental. There are two chemicals in you that are designed for you to take action in the environment, adrenaline and cortisol. With them comes a sense of agitation (which depending on your perspective will dictate whether that agitation is irritation or excitation). Now, you can't completely seperate the mind and body agitation because cortisol goes everywhere. But Adrenaline, adrenaline can't cross the blood brain barrier. If the brain wants adrenaline it will release it on its own. Brain-released adrenaline is called epinephrine (a very important molecule for biasing the brain-body toward action. Without it, it is very hard to get out of complacent inactive states.) Since much of meditation is about noticing how your body feels but distancing your mind from them, a part of that is because of you actively suppressing how much epinephrine is being released in the brain, in the face of an adrenaline-releasing event. (Therefore there is utility in either keeping the mind calm as life-stressors make your body excited and alert, or keeping your mind alert and focused as your body is calm as you are studying/learning.) Studies show, that any activity that is both easy (as in simple/not complex) + challenging (as in it grabs sufficient amount of your attention) provide the best opportunities to help you become the elementalist rather than the emotion-elemental. So, when enlightened you become more able to notice, acknowledge, and accept what feelings or thoughts or other sensations arise, and then to commit to the actions you choose to take, regardless of whether those actions match or doesn't match your internal experience. Later on, Dharma will be talked about as one way of helping you decide which direction to commit towards.

 Scientific Process Taken Wrong by the Media AGAIN-When Positive Psychology used to be Happy Psychology

 Look, you know it, Marty knows it, positive thinking is a scam, and it will never work.  There is SOME merit to it, but for the most part it will never work because the conditions for it to work don't exist, and it works at the level of the mind rather than the level of consciousness. And you don't learn things unless it reaches your subconscious. Many things in your mind expire and do not reach the subconscious. Not to mention, you don't need to convince yourself of anything, that just causes more problems in the mind; When you engage in positive thinking (or someone else engages you with positive thinking) you engage in A War that looks a lot like imposter syndrome. The focus on happiness, and positive thinking was critical to pivoting the direction of psychology, a science previously strayed by a focus on what is comparatively easy to quantify: reducing symptoms, reducing harm, reducing negativity, treating instead of building strength. We had to start somewhere to make this change, and happiness positive thinking was a no brainer. It is easy to quantify, understanding of the brain was still fresh, new technologies were developing, humanistic psychology was thrown to the wasteside and could finally be picked up to be rebranded without the negative connotations associated with it (rabbit holes, cults, WEEWOO scam-artists, "just find yourself bro" cliches, and all else spiritual) and my boy Marty just got elected to be the president of the APA (American Psychological Association.) Marty (founder of Positive Psychology) knew this was just the beginning, and quickly reframed the happiness model to one of PERMA (Positive Emotion, Engagement, Relationships, Meaning and Accomplishment, each of which touched upon in one tangential way or another in this post,) which provided a foundation for people to study all the cool catch phrases like Grit and Creativity, and all the other stuff we actually care about. Not to say positive thinking doesn't have utility. 

 Hypnosis and Sound Harmonics; When Positive Thinking works: The Modern Day Warcry

 The placebo effect is real. If it wasn't, many mental illnesses would be way easier to solve, because many of the thought bubbles that result from mental illness, the people that experience mental illness often don't believe the thought bubbles and are aware the thoughts don't align with reality, but it doesn't make the effects of these thoughts feel any less real. Vice versa, If you think it, it will affect you. And the effect might even be strong enough for you to start feeling and believing the thoughts, given appropriate external and/or internal environments that favor its installation, that further increases your suggestibility. 

 Our friends at Stanford are creating hypnosis tools (they also do other cool stuff like research acupuncture) that help people bring your state into states of deep relaxation, essentially disarming your mind and opening your consciousness. They work by using the body to, shift your mind towards a no-thought state but not a thought-without-thought state. That is, rather than an alert-focused wakeful state which activates learning, and rather than the deep rest state where the actual reconfiguration of what happened during learning in the brain occurs, Hypnosis brings both the focused and deep rest component into the same compartment of time. Hypnosis maximizes the learning bout and the deep relaxation (state of non-sleep, deep rest) bout and combines them. In this state it becomes hard to acquire detailed information. Hypnosis is more about shifts in state, like from fear to calm, or anxiety around sleep to release of anxiety around sleep, as opposed to specific information learning (which in turn often activates the insula, brain area related to our sense of interoception/internal-state, which in combination of the other effects associated with the change in our state, gives us simultaneously deep relaxation, focus and self-awareness.) The Hindus say Sankalpa [their variation of hypnosis] is to be done after meditation during a calm mind with the purpose to plant positive thoughts and be changed by them, not to control thoughts or grow willpower to stop negative thoughts. Sankalpa is a vow/commitment to your truth, and only works if it is unique to you, that is, if there is a desire, intention, or resolution that you want to practice and reinforce for a long time (a year+.) The Hindus hypothesized that the idea is that learning is a processing in the unconscious mind and that thoughts/knowledge come from the conscious mind to the unconscious mind. Moods, desires, experience and other stuff don't produce thoughts but they may result in having a thought/knowledge in the conscious mind permeating into the unconscious mind so that it can be later on recalled when applicable. You can see the intuition on whether this works or not if you think about your experiences with school. Clearly, when studying, it would be easier to do so with a clear mind, than a mind where the soil of thoughts is stirred, and where this stirred debris can block our knowledge from reaching the bottom. The goal of Sankalpa is to cultivate a mind that actually, instead of keeping you from doing the things you should do, actually prompts, helps and motivates you to do the things you should do (and doesn't lead you to fall into traps your mind makes).

 Sidenote about lessons from (un)learning neuroscience that indicate how cultivating particular states of the mind facilitate brain change; 4 Key takeaways at the end: Doing nothing is a key to physical/emotional learning and unlearning, which are two code words for highlighting errors, strengthening desirable connections and weakening undesirable connections. (Un)Learning normally happens during deep sleep and REM sleep. Deep sleep is generally during the early stages of sleep and is more associated with recovery of the body, motor movements, detailed information/specific events such as specific rules, word spellings. REM sleep is generally associated with the later stages of sleep and with dreams, and is about unlearning emotional events (with the added benefit that emotional-laden events are chemically blocked from having the actual emotion during REM sleep). Meditation-like activates engage in very similar coupling and uncoupling processes, because you aren't bringing in new information while doing meditation, you're just going through old information as you do something relatively simple (and if it's not simple you're probably doing the wrong meditation for you. Remember, Easy + Challenging). After a skill-learning session, any kind of motor movement, provided you are not bringing in a lot more additional new sensory stimuli, there's a replay of the motor sequence you perform correctly, and elimination of the motor sequences you performed incorrectly. Likewise, similar stuff happens when you do nothing after a session of emotion-experiencing. The maladaptive connections decay and dissolve as you unwind them by doing nothing more than the meditation. If you just sit there (do nothing, not focused on additional learning, not bringing a lot of sensory information in, just sit there and close eyes) for 5-10 minutes, even 1 minute, the brain starts doing some of the wiring related to learning and unlearning. Not to say you should just sit there and do nothing as your meditative practice. It's just that there's a certain state of the mind that has a lot of properties that are similar to sleep in terms of processing information. Your brain can't devote its resources to reviewing information, if it is being bombarded with information it needs to work through. If you have the right meditative process for you, it will be easy (as in, simple to do/not complex) & challenging (as in, it grabs sufficient amount of your attention.) It will demand you to focus on some task, a task that has the potential to leave you in a state of non-sleep deep rest afterwards. (One caveat, be careful about cognitive learning. You actually want to spike your adrenaline/epinephrine immediately after cognitive learning, rather than engaging in meditation. Preferably, some sort of physical activity, one where the activity involves wordlessness, essentially a thought without thought mode, a mode where you are not really thinking about anything, and one that involves Letting the mind drift, that is, engaging in a mind wandering mode, where it's not organized in thought. The heightened awareness and alertness helps you remember everything that lead up to that spike in adrenaline and cortisol. This adrenaline-remembering mechanism is a cognitive survival mechanism; When this mechanism has gone wrong, it's known as PTSD. You can engage in meditation some time after the cognitive learning bout, with the goal of engaing a non-sleep deep rest state to help review/consolidate/prune the information, just don't do it immediately after the bout. If you listen to the Hindus, You can engage in meditation before the cognitive learning bout to clear your mind of debris, but to my knowledge there is not data that supports this. Rather than immediate effects, the studies show longitudinal effects from just general practice of meditation. Studies suggest 3-5 days of practice, for 20 minutes at 8 weeks is what is needed for a statistically significant change in your life. For sure though, there are meditations you can do before a cognitive learning bout to help you engage in the most suitable mind state for learning: Being Calm, yet Alert and Focused. If you want to change your brain, you cannot just passively experience things. Deliberate focused attention is key. If you're too energetic there are meditations to calm you down. Being calm helps you direct your attention in one direction. Also, there are Meditations that instead of putting you into a more resting state, they put you into a more energetic state. Being alert and focused while learning is critical as it releases epinephrine (responsible for feeling alert, agitated [a key feature of learning] and increased attention, and you need to have alertness to have focus) and acetylcholine (create an even more intense and focused perceptual spotlight by highlighting parts of what you experienced especially during periods of heightened attention because you need to have focus in order to direct acetylcholine to mark the relevant parts of our nervous system for change. Do note though that being calm, alert & focus has its limits in learning because they only open the gates for plasticity. How much plasticity is actually done is gated by meaning/importance. So being deliberate is key. For most people, they hit a limit in their learning, because the need to change is not crucial enough. When people have to change from an internal standpoint, from their own belief and desire to change, massive change is possible. If there's an important reason for you to actually learn, the (un)learning will be accelerated even if you are making failures. Also, failures is a key part of learning as it signals to the body a need for change. Moreover, the synergy between engaging in failure and telling us that those failures are good for learning and are good for us takes advantage of our dopamine systems (of pursuit). Finding pleasure in the frustration creates the optimal milieu for learning that thing and for learning other things afterward (because those chemicals don't disappear immediately). If you leverage the frustration towards drilling deeper into the endeavor you are setting yourself to a terrific set of plasticity mechanisms to engage. When we start to approximate the correct behavior even the tiniest bit, dopamine is released to create a sense of satisfaction (not with the activity itself but with hitting a milestone) and to further encourage this behavior by inducing a craving for more (plus dopamine re-ups epinephrine, which biases us towards action. Also, epinephrine is synthesized from dopamine. Makes sense since dopamine basically biases us towards a certain direction as we take action.) If you do the opposite and respond to that frustration by walking away from the endeavor. You are essentially setting up plasticity to rewire you according to what happens after, which is usually feeling shitty. Another reason, why meditation should be easy + challenging.] And if there's anything to say the least about (un)learning is that most of it, the actual brain rewiring, happens during deep sleep, REM sleep or deep rest. And practicing Meditation certainly helps you enter the sleep state.) 
 Anyways, as for (un)learning's relationship to spiritual growth, to change who you are, there's 4 key components for making change on a neural electrochemical level: 1) Being calm, yet alert and focused is optimal for highlighting what needs to be changed in the brain during rest. 2) Get good sleep/rest. Do nothing to wire/unwire/rewire brain. 3) Meaning/importance. This is what accelerates learning rate. 4) Most importantly, Be deliberate. It is your internal standpoint that matters the most. Your own autonomy, and choice. Your own belief and your own focus on putting in your best effort to change. Confidence in the face of failure. When you be deliberate, when you align your internal standpoint towards your chosen direction, the other 3 key components that allow for learning, for brain change, will happen automatically. When you are deliberate and align yourself in a laser-type way, there's only one thing in your attentional spotlight and therefore only one thing that can logistically have meaning/importance to you, and only one thing your brain will highlight, and your ability to rest is improved because there is less mind racing, less attempts at building a makeshift infrastracture of understanding in the mind, less attempts at building connectivity between non-closely related stimuli. The simplicity and clarity that comes with training your ability to direct your focus opens up the fastest lane for making change. Okay, so back to the value of mind-states and positive thinking. 

 The problem with Hypnosis and Sankalpa, this is a dependency, a temporary buff. It has utility in allowing you to dip your toes in the water to see how it feels and what you should expect. It's cool and useful, use it it if you have to, like if you're actually going into war and need a warcry. Use it if it is a convenient cue to set the mood or set your mindset, like your favorite coffee shop playlist or your favorite ritual before you shoot a free-throw. Otherwise, don't depend on it because the real spiritual growth comes from doing the dirty work yourself. That way, if need be, you can do what you want to do without buffs, without making sure things have to be "right" first [because "woe is you, how will you get work done if you don't got the playlist playing in the background and the right setting?"], and that way engaging in buffs is a choice, not a dependency. Buffs shape the state of your consciousness but not level up your base consciousness. They allow you to be empowered, but what you need is to Empower Your Self.

 And it ain't a coincidence that the fundamental harmony that underlies all things Hindu is Ohm, (you know the one, the sound that people meme about when people mock meditation,) when done correctly is mewing (In fact a core of a lot of meditations is having good posture that supports proper diaphragmatic breathing. You might not know this but your body has a natural balancing mechanism through nasal breathing. Right nostril is more connected to the sympathetic nervous system, left more to parasympathetic. And the nasal cycle tends to have a higher rate when you are inflamed.) The idea of Ohm posits that you don't need positive thinking or its variants (law of attraction, being a Chad, etc...), they don't work, what works is acknowledging the badness and the goodness, and what you'll find at the very bottom underlies Ohm, and when you get in touch of the bottom of who you, that you are fine the way you are. In other words, Breathwork underlies all meditative practices, all practices towards enlightenment, there's no way around it. Mantras are phrases that accumulate and harmonize energy. Mantra repetition calms the mind, and when repeatedly done, it builds a big enough presence to push out all other thoughts, and then our mind becomes blank, ready. Mantras are almost the opposite of a trauma. Traumas are something, that unless you digest it and share it, is like a negative energy that compounds and grows over time unless you let it out. Mantras are a positive energy that grows within you and the second you tell another soul it's vented out (because sharing, is in itself a digestion mechanism, although when the external world provides feedback to your sharing, this can compound the power of your mantra.) Whether you are actually emitting a phrase or not, mantras underlie all practices that push you towards enlightenment. And if you do meditation long enough, you will obtain Ajapa Japa, essentially the mantra on autopilot, you will experience the effects of the mantra without actually doing the mantra. The way this works is that mantras sync up the harmonies of the body, including the mind processes, you get closer to harmonizing with Ohm, nonharmonizing noise in the mind and body dampens out, the more distance you gain from your body (hence the phrase "take a step back"), you take a step so far back from your body that you start moving towards Brahman (the deity? that originated the universe? the one without quality? the one that cannot be described?) aka Enlightenment. The idea behind mantras is that they're like Legos, if we get better in tune with how our mind works, then we can cut the crap and start putting together the Legos of our mind to start exerting influence on the world, to start sowing seeds of Karma that may bloom. The idea is to help you reconcile with the duality of how your effort does not guarantee an effect on the world nor guarantee desired results from the world, but when the results of your Karma seeds do bear fruit it sure as hell feels like you used your inner power to manipulate the universe to get what you want. So, meditation, by having an effect on your psychology and your biology, levels up your ability to enact your transcendent intentions. 
 
 (Sidenote about Karma- there is some association with Karma and reincarnation as a source of morality but really Karma is a principle of cause and effect. Morality does not even come into the equation of how reincarnation happens. Karma is about how the current state of things are just natural consequence of events that happened before. Each seed of Karma you sow, each action you take, has its own chance to bloom in the future. The reincarnation stuff is sprinkled on because actions not only affect you, but they have a societal impact. You know, seven generations? You have an impact on 3 past selves before you and 3 future selves after you. Something like that. Butterfly effects and all that. Like, people like to talk about bad and good Karma, but Karma is just about how past events inform your current situation. Current actions will inform later situations. How exactly? well it's like gardening, there's variability in whether seeds even bloom at all, and there's variability in when they bloom. And in this process, what do you have control over? What type of seeds you plant and how much you plant. Otherwise, the idea of bad and good in respect to karma is just a way of categorizing some interactions. I mean generally if you're sowing pro-societal seeds of karma vs anti-societal seeds of karma, one of these seed types clearly has a higher chance of producing an outcome most people would deem favorable. They're not saying there is some sort of karmic force at work, they're just explaining a cause and effect phenomenon that just makes logical sense. Good begets good. Now whether good actually happens or not is a different story, but generally good actions move the distribution of possible outcomes towards the good end of the possibility spectrum. Like, if you do good, it doesn't mean you deserve good outcomes. If you do good, you increase the chances of pro-societal outcomes happening. It doesn't mean that if you were born in a bad situation that you deserved to be in a bad situation. It's just that these are the karma seeds that have bloomed for you. That actions have consequences, and the only thing you can do is play the hand that is dealt to you to the best to your ability. And how you play your hand may or may not change what hand is dealt to you later. There's a similar sidenote on personality later on.)

 The science version of Karma: AKA Free Will does not exist (Basically from Dr. Robert Sapolsky)
 Depends on your definition. For the most part though free will does not exist because a lot of the things that lead to your behavior and choice comes from many things out of your control. To understand why you made that behavior and where that intention came from. Some of it is from the sensory environment you were in the previous second, some are frmo the hormone levles in your blood stream this morning, some of it is from whether you had a wonderful or stressful last three months, part of is what hormone levels you were exposed to as a fetus, a part is from what culture your ancestors came up. All of those are in there, all relevant factors incorporated into your behavior and choices. They're all intertwined, even if you could identify a neuron or network of neurons that caused that behavior, but at the same what they just did was influenced by every other factor out there. Nothing about what those neurons did can be isolated from the influence of the very present sensory environment all the way back to the origin of our species. Basically the concept of karma. All past factors informs the current present. Not leaving any space for free will anywhere in that time period because our behaviors and choices are consequence of a long line of dominoes that fell prior to that behavior. The knowledge of this, that your choices are somewhat predetermined, it doesn't give you free will but what it can do is produce wonderfully positive belief that change can happen. This doesn't mean we can change ourselves, because there's no free will. But we can be changed by circumstnace. Learning change is possible, despite understanding we can't change ourselves volitionally, we can't change ourselves through free will, but understanding change is possible does change the ability of your brain to respond to optimistic stimuli. You have changed the ability of your brain to now send you in the direction of being exposed to more information that will seem cheerful rather than depressing. Things like reading more about people who had success in adverse situations, to get more data points about changed neurochemistry so that your responses are different now. Enormous change can happen, despite the fact that we are nothing more or less than the sum of our biology and its interaction with the environment. Not to say that this knowledge concludes that it is useless to make effort, to give up as if it's no use trying to change anything. There is still utility in trying to change things. However, free will just doesn't have any place at all in the understanding of how we came to generate our effort to try to change things. We can feel like we have free will, but it's not a thing that actually exists. Our effort to try to change things was a result/was determined from esentially an infinite number of factors that are outside of our control. This oxymoron of Free will is not based in the reality of how reality works, Circumstances can change us, yet striving to be better human beings is still a worthwhile endeavour. This oxymoron is right because knowledge that change can happen within a framework of a mechanistic neurobiology, makes you more optimistic and inspired by things in your sensory environment. Simply because you understand this is possible, this neuroplasticity. This understanding that neural circuits can change in response to experience, and some of the top-down mechanisms of the prefrontal cortex can play a role there. Free will may not exist but we do have the power to use our understanding of neuroplasticity whether this understanding be explicit or implicit, to change our brain and to help us find utility in trying to change thing, plus this experience of exerting effort towards change will in turn also change our brain. This is a fact we can realize, that the decision to try and change, and the pursuit of knowledge and experience can and does shape our circuitry. For example, prenatal hormone exposure changed the way your brain is being constructed, and in addition to that, knowing that will also change your brain right now. Knowledge of knowledge is an effector itself. So, in summary. If you define free will as whether we have the capability of being masters of our fate, of being able to change our destiny, this is a concept that does not exist and has no place to exist, because the behaviors we exhibit and choices we make are predetermined by all the factors that lead up to those actions. And so will the decisions after that be predetermined. However, if you define free will as our ability to try to change things, or put more simply to engage in neuroplasticity, then sure, we have free will and so does any other organism that exhibits neuroplasticity. The only deifference between us and them is our ability to engage in the prefrontal cortex as a tool for engaging neuroplasticity. And knowing this knowledge about neuroplasticity is in itself a powerful tool to facilitate neuroplasticity. Likewise, knowing other stuff will too change our circuitry. Therefore, when it comes to free will we are neither in control of our fate nor should we be hopeless about inducing change because our machinery has neural plasticity. Otherwise, free will is a meaningless concept, as meaningless as colorless green ideas sleep furiously. Not to say we can't find meaning in the concept, Not to say we can't experience things in trying to understand the concept, but just to say if we were to try to disect it, it is a thing that cannot and does not exist because it is something that does not make any sense whatsoever, and cannot possibly have a basis in our lived reality. We do make choices, but these choices are predetermined by all the things that lead up to that choice including neuroplasticity, and our future choices are predetermined as well by all the things that lead up to that future point including neuroplasticity. And as already mentioned, we do engage in neuroplasticity by doing things like trying to change things and gaining knowledge and experience, such as the knowledge of how neuroplasticity works and how free will does not exist. So, do subtract agency from all types of things we blame people for. Not to say we shouldn't keep them accountable. We want to hold people to high standards for sure. Subtracting agency is not an excuse to remove duty or excuse people from taking responsibility for things they've done. So even though it is not someones fault that they did whatever they did. They still did it and they ought to take responsibility for the things they did. Recognize we do have neuroplasticity and that we can find utility in trying to change things, and a major part that comes with this effort to try to change things is the part about trying to take responsibility for things we did, even if those things are not our fault, we need to take the punishments and rewards that are associated with the things we did. It is predetermined whether we succeed or not in this endeavor to make change, and whether we succeed or not is not in our control at all, but nonethless our environment does it is not in our control at all of whether we succeed, but nonetheless we are blessed with neuroplastic machinery, that is, our circuitry can and does get changed (by its environment) which is why we should try to make change and is also why we find utility in knowing about neuroplasticity, that is, we find utility in knowing that our machinery does change.


 What Science points to ->

 Transcendence is why the hippy sciences connected drugs with meditation. If you read Siddhartha, then you might remember that when Buddha tried really hard to become enlightened he resorted to aesthetic practices, Tapasya. Essentially, self deprivation, like fast for very long periods of time. What he actually found instead was that he got extremely high. Neuroscientific evidence that spiritual experiences in meditation are due to very high levels of CO2 in the brain. Normally it can be damaging or toxic (it's one of the ways people commit suicide). What they hypothesized is that regular meditators very experienced in meditation (decades+) tend to have a very low respiratory rate. Low respiratory rate>increases Co2 levels a lot. Elevated Co2>Brain starts malfunctioning. In those malfunctions it is believed that people have trippy spiritual experiences due to toxic levels of CO2. It ain't all bad, doing meditation on a regular basis acclimatizes to these levels. When CO2 is elevated, brain tells you to breathe more, to rapidly breathe. But when you meditate regularly, it starts to recruit other mechanisms that do not require rapid breathing. As mentioned, you begin to have a very low respiratory rate. When your heart is starved for oxygen, it sends signals to create collateral circulation, arteries get clogged, the heart slows down. Two things happen in response, dilate articles to ease congestion, and angiogenesis or creating more blood vessels. An adaptive function so that if you develop a blocked artery you have alternate paths of circulation, rather than dying from a heart attack. (Tangent note is the paperbag breathing technique for hyperventilating is that it drops the O2 level and increases the CO2 level in the paperbag. Normally, as your internal CO2 level increases it causes you to take shallow rapid breaths, but as your O2 level drops it causes you to take the desired deeper breaths.) [For more on the benefits of CO2, and proper breathing in general, I HIGHLY reccomend you read Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art by James Nestor. And I don't lightly reccomend books because many of them are dry, nonsciency, bloated, or repetitive. This one isn't; It's entertaining and informative the whole ride.]

 Lessons from creativity neuroscience - Often meditation turns down the Default Mode Network, related to mental imagery, self reflection, and processing your stream of consciousness (and thus related to creative output. It is often referred to as the Imagination Network.) DMN is most active when you're at rest or ruminating or mind wandering (it's called default mode because it has to do with the way our brain functions by default, or more specifically, the way our brain idles). The DMN probably activates the executive control network which is active when you are doing something that involves focused attention and working memory, and heightened awareness (in an analytical type or decision-making type way, which in combination with the DMN is akin to analyzing the potential execution of connections). And the DMN likely turns down the salience network as well which detects and integrates (incoming sensory) information from your body and emotions and particularly activates when you're challenged or anxious or on edge as you intake incoming information. (Sort of, because usually what happens in general is that the DMN and saliency are highly active during earlier stages of creativity when you are intaking information from your external or internal environment. Then, saliency network tends to taper of as you get more analytically creative. [Well, sort of, in reality the 3 networks, DMN, saliency, and executive control, are much more fluid and dynamic in nature. They aren't at odds with each other at all. Although logistically linked and influence each other, they can individually (de)activate independently of the other networks' (de)activation. Like the DMN + Executive network can work together so that you deeply focus on your creative thoughts.]) So, the hypothesis is that, meditation turns down Default Mode Network activation. Okay, that's an inaccurate statement. It's more like we're activating a calm accessing and flow version of the Default Mode Network, that allows you to be aware inside and out, a calm abiding balanced awareness where the DMN is aware of the in, (when the DMN is aware of the out is what leads to daydreaming and other massive creative connection activity) while your task network/executive control network is aware of the out [so you realize and are aware of what you're doing]. So, even though the DMN is inhibited, it is still playing an active and critical role for being in the awakened state) which turns down thought bubble-generators, turns down the making of creative connections, turns down how many sources are diverted to weighing decisions (because there's less connections to weigh), and increases the saliency of what you are experiencing (because there's less connections to be salienced), which all together improves your ability to have a one-pointed mind towards focusing on what you are feeling/doing/being.And in this way, since the state of the mind is simple you are calm, and since you are focused on experiencing, you will likely feel connected to whatever enters the focus of your attention (yay Conscious Awareness, yay Active Focus.) And if you read between the lines and make inferential implications, going on the path of enlightenment will improve the functioning of all of your body's organs by not pushing and pulling the body and mind in too many different directions, because each connection your brain forms MUST have some form of bodily response because the brain and body was evolved to make adaptive responses (That is, the 4 simple modes of fight, flight, freeze, or rest and digest. Well there's more because the possible emotional variations [which bias our body towards (in)action in different ways] we can have is limited in scope but endless in variety. But those 4 modes make it very easy to think about the body because there's only two things each individual part of the body can do, increase or decrease activation in response) to incoming information to increase reproductive fitness, and each connection the brain forms has an individual influence on biasing the body towards a particular mode of functioning, and for each conflicting connection the brain makes, the more your body will be like a chicken running with its head off. 

 Studying Brain Scans, Deliberate vs Effortless mindfulness - "People watch monks, see them do things like fast and meditate and try to imitate them. This is what spiritual people do, so I'm going to do that thing to become more spiritual. But these people got it backwards. Because those behaviors are a consequence of an internal change, not the other way around. It's not forcibly living a simple, renounced, and detached life that will create the spirituality. It is the detachment/renunciation that lets you live life, regardless of how difficult or simple life is. To effortlessly Be. To live life not forcibly." ~Dr. K. A lot of western meditation are repressive in nature. By actively repressing the DMN it does create a desirable state, that has merit akin to a nap or a sauna. However, this doesn't create the brain waves associated with the enlightened state that's great for engaging with the world. Actively repressing the DMN makes it so that your brain waves go from beta (associated with mind chatter, the mind-chatter state is great for bringing brain into focused states for sustained thought or for incorporating new information) to alpha (calmer quiet state, great state for recall of existing information). Alpha waves are not far from theta waves, the state of subtle sleep, the so deeply relaxed but not fully asleep state that some people do meditation for. But for the enlightened state you aren't repressing anything, what you get is synchronized gamma waves (Gamma is literally a higher frequency state, typically 32-100 hz, compared to 15-20 hz beta [mind chatter-associated], 8-13 hz alpha [recall existing-associated], 4-8 hz theta [rest-associated], 1-4 hz delta [sleep-associated]). Unlike the mindfulness meditations that tend to favor the more tunnel-downed and less panoramic states of beta or alpha, these synchronized gamma waves, are associated with the balanced awareness state. The balanced awareness state refers to a Much wider mental panorama, an awareness of both the internal and the external (expanding all of your senses' field of view, especially auditory and visual, so really taking being present with you and your world to the next level, maybe even as a result experiencing awe and deep felt sense of connections), that makes it a great state for learning and problem solving. These two states are the difference between oppressing your mind by distracting it versus accepting your mind and letting things be the way they are. Generally the type of meditations that go from beta to alpha, are more one-directional practices. You place your attention on one thing/task which forces non-related mental activity to calm down because it is impossible for them to have any relevance for the activity you are engaged in. Practicing this transition from beta to alpha is a good approximate to the synchronized gamma state, and has value, especially if you are someone that has a pacing mind. It will train your mind to be accustomed to making less mental chatter, more accustomed to sitting with existing information. In turn allowing you to be more pragmatic of how much information is recalled and be more pragmatic about your information processing rate. In turn, this calm state practicing makes the synchronized gamma state more accessible to you, because now you have less things that are less likely to be recalled and distracting you from engaging with the external. The synchronized gamma state, the balanced awareness state is what meditation is really about. You need to be in a highly alert state in order to bring new information in, in order to access a state of mind which in a way is like you telling your brain, "Okay, Brain, I need to learn this, try this, and problem solve this thing." This is why stress and unfortunate circumstances are so memorable, because our brain gets into a really high alert system. And entering this state doesn't require any jedi mind tricks, none of those one-pointed practices. You can readily enter it. If you need help entering it, there are non-duality meditations, which is focused on acceptance for how things are. If your mind chatters, let it chatter, watch it chatter. Don't beat yourself up because you feel like "your mind is not supposed to chatter." Now, not everyone is ready for non-duality meditation, as this type of meditation will open up the door to all that you have repressed. Engaging in the balanced awareness state takes away your ego, therefore taking away your ego defenses. All of the feelings you may have burried underneath will come rushing out. It will be a ton of unconscious debris that will make it a very tumultuous ride and weaken your connection to the synchronized gamma frequencies. So, you may have to engage with various brain states to process some of this debris before fully engaging in the gamma state once again. Doing things like making sense of things, learning, problem solving, letting go of things that cannot be known or redone, recalling and sitting with existing information, resting, sleeping. But you can do it, air out the damp cellar every now and then at your own pace. If it becomes too overwhelming, engage in a grounding technique. Take it piece by piece, and take breaks. Each blip of gamma is like an aha moment, some combination of awe, contentness, joy, and alertness, that is also conducive for synergizing with creative flow. 

 Evolutionary Sleep Sophistry
 If you think about it, We evolved to be awake to sleep. As in, our basal state is to sleep. And being awake is just a way for optimizing our sleep. This may surprise people as people think sleep as quiescence, as inactivity. But sleep is a very active state of the mind. There's a lot of synchrony and recallibration that happens during sleep, which is a very active process. During REM sleep, our body may be paralyzed (except for the eyes and ears) but that's likely an evolutionary trait to prevent us from self-harming, because during REM sleep the activity of the brain is pretty hard to distinguish from waking (presumably, sleep is the ultimate cram session in the case we need to be awake). It'd be pretty spooky if our body started to actually doing things but we are not consciously aware of it. But yet that's how we started, as microorganisms that don't really change states in how they function. We didn't grow out of this, we gained the ability to be awake, to change states in order to get better at it. In a way, being awake comes at the cost of not being able to sleep. So when people develop the perspective that sleep comes at the cost of not being able to be awake, that's probably why they become manic. It's just backwards to think that way. Most of our growth (of all kinds), contrary to popular belief doesn't happen while we're awake, it happens while we sleep. Not to say we should stay asleep, since being awake and experiencing things is what provides fuel for our neuroactivity during sleep (and we do wake up after each ~90 minute sleep cyle). Being awake is what gives us that feeling of a good night's sleep, that feeling of waking up peacefully after a bout of enjoying and experiencing the state we weren't even aware we experienced. And I'm not sure where meditation and spiritual growth comes into play here but since they both have been shown to do wonders for people's ability to smoothly transition between brain states, and therefore improve their ability to transition into and out of sleep, it's probably a good thing. In fact, there is no major psychiatric disorder that coincides with having normal sleep. So, I would really think about what are you going to do while you're awake about your life in order to provide yourself a good night's sleep? We were evolved to find in sleep the meaning in experience, whether that experiencing be suffering, appreciating, appreciating, learning, etc...to live as the defiant soul you evolved to be.

 The neuroscientific reason for why connections are made at all has to do with the fact that topographically the limbic system (neural circuit involved with the assignment of internal state to external cue, which you might call emotion, but more accurately it's the adjustment of the internal state in response to the environment), amygdala (involved with threat detection, well more accurately emotional significance, well more acccurately biasing you towards changing your behavior by tethering the attention of your internal state towards the relevant environmental cue that is novel, threatening or exciting) and hippocampus (involved with long-term learning/memory) are essentially butt buddies that surround the ventricle system (the Mediterranean sea) of the brain where they can essentially push out immediate hormonal signals and neural commands to move (or not move) our body to survive and live another day (and further down the reaction chain the hormonal signals will lead to the release of hormones that allow us to learn from this experience via connections in the brain). It is adaptive for us to learn quickly in the face of threat, to learn quickly if something is painful/harmful to us, or in the face of high emotion. The key to learning is dishing out heightened alertness, and a honed attentional spotlight. And anything that agitates (good or bad, but especially bad) releases the relevant hormones (epinephrine and acetylcholine) which unlock the neural gates to make changes to brain connections. This, is the bottom-up process of learning, where the amygdala activation (upon threat recognition) shuts down who we are in order to activate our instinct (what the amygdala does is that it notes that our internal state is not matching the external events, but changing the internal state takes time and we don't have time to change the internal state so it rings sirens to indicate that we need to behave NOW, to link the internal and external NOW. Most of the time this is a good thing because otherwise there would be a big disruption in the relationship between our internal state and external events. It's just burdensome for spiritual growth because) It actively shuts down our more advanced parts of the brain, the cerebral cortex where we do a lot of our analytical thinking, planning and following through with plans, problem solving capabilities, complex understanding of things, to see things in nuance, to see things in shades of gray. Therefore, when the amygdala activates it biases us to animalistic/primal responses as opposed to sophisticated ways of looking at things. This is adaptive because we want sophisticated thought when we are calm and not in danger. And we want black and white thinking and instant responses when we're in danger because it is a life or death situation. The amygdala siren locks our internal state to be tethered towards the events around us, to biasing us to behave in response to what alarms us and therefore closing us off towards other things. All this attention and alerting makes learning happen easily but this is not the only way we can learn. We can learn through top-down processes, as long as we're also engaging heightened alertness and a honed attentional spotlight. In the relaxed state, the tether between our internal state and our environment is a lot more loose, because the sirens aren't ringing. It allows us to be open to new contingencies, to be more open to weakening the hold external events has on our internal environment. However, to learn, to make changes, by using top-down processes to short circuit bottom-up processes while maintaining and attention and alertness requires practice. There are many ways we can do this, but all of them will involve repeatedly using the Executive Control parts of our brain (mostly the prefrontal part of the cerebral cortex) to evaluate whether it is an appropriate time to humor our instinct or if we can continue towards one particular path of our choice instead aka turning on the very parts of the brain that the amygdala turns off. Some of them ways will involve A) not feeding connections the amygdala-salience-hippocampus combo have pushed to form by detaching yourself from the mind & body responses those connections make (which will involve processing/not pushing away/not arguing with/understanding/feeling those mind & body responses) aka the power of time heals all wounds aka emptying the unprocessed feelings trashcan aka this is the only way to tell your brain that our previous concerns are no longer warranted in the present. Some of these ways will involve B) redirecting your attention towards the activity of interest as your default mode network finds ways to distract you because its job is to make connections between what has been learned to other parts of the brain, which results in phenomenon such as adware-like thoughts popping up going "hey buddy, did you consider this?" AKA acknowledging whatever feelings/thoughts pop up for you, feeling it, and then going okay I got shit to do, bye bye now. Both of which simplify the amount of things that can be made salient to our mind, and practice our ability to be observational/acknowledging of our internal workings, and practice our ability to redirect our attention away from what doesn't matter and towards what does matter to us. Because we can't control what arises. Our stream of consciousness is like the water in a pot of boiling water. The shape is quite amorphous, and is some sort of field. Bubbles are perturbations in the field, where things just arise and take shape due to all sorts of non-conscious processes, such as the spatial-topographical relationship between parts of the brain, or things as simple as getting adequate Vitamin D from the sun. We can't control what bubbles form (can't control nonconscious processes), but we can use our behavior to influence the probability of which bubble types form in the future (creating a sort of chain-butterfly effect). In a very spiritual way, the universe is kind of unfolding and we have a magical experience of witnessing this unfolding from a particular point of view. You can influence your experience through conscious will, but you do not have free will on what conscious experiences arise. 

Relaxation and the Timing of Personal Development
 The reduced activation of the amygdala during relaxed states is also why relaxed states are better for creativity. The decreased amygdala activtiy, and therefore the decreased tether between the internal and external, also makes us more able to create new contingencies, that is, taking existing things and organizing them in new ways in space and time. You can take advantage of this, as there are times of the day where you are more likely to be relaxed and productive than others. Around 3 hours after waking time tends to be our best time towards highly focused deep work for 90 minutes, and around 11 hours after for creative work for 90 minutes. Why? It is related to our internal temperatures and circadian rhythms which in combination tend to lean towards more tethered work early on while we have our morning endogenous cortisol bump [a wakefulness signal] and the rising body temperature encourages alertness, and less tethered work later on when the build up of adenosine [which creates a sleep hunger] and less cortisol lingering and falling body temperature encourages us to be in a more relaxed state but not necessarily sleepy yet since melatonin, the sleepiness signal, begins releasing about 12-14 hours after waking. (This is also why people who shower in the morning tend to do cooler showers, and people who shower in the evening tend to do warmer showers.) So, early day is better for deep focus and attention. While the later day is better for connection coupling and uncoupling analysis. Also, we tend to have eaten food by the time later day arrives, which will divert some resources towards rest and digesting, and some foods (mostly carbs) release serotonin which is associated with satiation and stillness (and not coincidentally synthesizes into melatonin). 
 With all this in mind, it is not a coincidence that ancient wisdom indicates that the most optimal times for meditation is around sunset and sunrise. The particular blue and yellow light contrast that comes during these critical periods of the day lands on our retina where our melanopsin retinal ganglion cells take note of that and send that information to its next-door neighbor the circadian clock, which sends signals to everything else to be sync at particular times. (By the way, get f.lux for your computer. F.lux is a free program that tries to mimic sunrise and sunset.) It is not a coincidence that watching the sunrise and sunset is extremly calming. Our cells need light information to act in synchrony and to avoid clashing erroneously with each other like a kid trying to learn the piano. And getting information about sun rise and sunset is the only possible information our various cells and organs can get to know how to harmonize with each other (although the body tries to make do with things you do regularly such as meal times or exercise times.) The other signals just tells our body to speed up or slow down, nothing about synchrony. Not to mention that looking out in the distance causes the body to engage in a more panoramic and relaxed mode, less tunnel vision, contracting of the pupils, a wider view of the world both mentally and visually, slower breathing, and all the other things associated with a calmer mind-body state. This practice of meditation around the suns transitions, sets you up for success. Supporting healthy circadian rhythms and therefore healthy body temperature rhythms, and healthy hormonal rhythms, and therefore providing you the two previously mentioned very opportune times to be productive. The sun's yellow and blue contrast (also there's studies that indicate that the red light is valuable for maintaining the ability to see color contrast), combined with the meditation practice will put you in a relaxation state that is suitable for transitioning into sleepiness and into wakefulness. Plus you will have to move to get there, and the brain-body loves movement that generates optic flow. The body loves movement and seeing things move past you so much, just generating optic flow without movement is enough to suppress the amygdala (This is the basis of EMDR therapy), further compounding our ability to be in a relaxed state! Now, we live in a modern world though, so do what makes sense to you, as it may not be feasible to function as our body has evolved to function. 

 An oversimplification of What your soul looks like in the brain. You find your soul when you turn down the Default Mode Network (well more accurately, activate a calm accessing and flow version of the DMN that is aware of the in rather than the out, or rather than the in and out.) A state where we are piercingly conscious of the contents of our consciousness, but not have our brain areas related to the self-related (i.e., identity-related) processing be active. Witnessing Consciousness, a state where there's a strong felt experience of self without the self-referential experiences. The Default Mode Network was evolutionarily designed to understand who you are in relationship to your community. Therefore, its activation strays you away from who you truly are, towards who you think you are. It is why we have identity crises, but deer just do deer things. Deer are never confused about who they are. Deer are always cool, calm and collected. Not to say they don't get anxious or depressed. Those things happen too, but it never strays them from being who they are: calm and collected, and alert; fully engaged. You find your soul essentially engaging the world as someone who is engaged in the calm, collected, and alert mode, that is, additionally freed from diverting sources towards mind processes that would demand to be in the view of your attentional spotlight, freeing up resources that can now be used towards shaping and executing what you are focused on. Every time you engage with your soul, you are doing either a mental push up of training the inhibition part of your executive control-to ignore what doesn't matter, and to communicate with the saliency network about what does matter-or you are either making the conditions easier for your executive control to do its thing by not overreacting to incoming information. The mind needs some kind of identity to understand how to interact with the outside world and make babies. If you don't engage the world with your soul, you will default to interacting with the world in the ways you have learned to interact with it, the ways you identify with. You will engage the default mode network, a particular mode of the brain, that serves to be the networker of the interacting areas of the brain. And the nature of the connections being made and what's being shared during networking will tend to lean towards your normal tendencies (the neurological path most paved with least resistance): some shade or combination of fight, flight or freeze, with some derivation of being swayed either by your top-down processing (executive control network suppressing your natural tendencies) or your bottom-up processing (the response to incoming sensory information, which at an extreme is emotional lability, when your emotions can rise and fall quickly, aka what commoners mistakenly label as bipolar.) A lot of over-emotionality or catastrophizing is about seeing problems everywhere and that would make sense if you start linking the experience of your web too extensively, aka an overactive DMN (sort of. A highly active DMN generally represents great attentional flexibility, a good thing. The actual issue here is too many connections being highlighted as salient, which promotes that alarmed state.) To have healthy emotional and cognitive function it is important we have very narrow channels between individual things. That is, chances are that when we have poor mental health we are not actively removing the meaning and connectivity between life experiences as well as we could. REM sleep (generally associated with dreams and begins to pick up 4-5 hours into sleep) goes a long way for the unlearning of these emotional events, to detach from attachments you have made, to weaken the strength between neurochemical connections that exist in the brain, to collect and narrow the connections of the brain that are actually important so that you don't overreact to connections that are not important. A lot of the potential neurochemical malfunctions the brain can express greatly decreases in its ability to occur when the mind isn't all over the place. REM sleep can do this because it deactivates the amygdala, the linker between emotional events and how we feel internally, and with the linker dismantled you are able to process these events and connections without having to go through all the panicing and whatnot, and we are able to process the events in an efficient way because rather than going through those events chronologically piece-by-piece, space and time is untethered and very fluid. Sometimes REM sleep alone is not enough, so during waking this is where the enlightenment path comes in, a process of engaging the calm, collected, and alert mode (to reduce the amount of bizarre stress-inducing connections that would have otherwise been made in our default mode and) to take existing neural circuits and rewiring the patterns of connections (especially maladaptive ones) so that they serve us better. Enlightenment is the path of learning how to keep things simple, things the mind would otherwise overcomplicate. A state where we feel who we are without feeling the mental constructions we identify as. The soul is a feeling of consciousness with the volume turned down on the conscious processes of the human brain.

 From the personality literature we learn that change happens incrementally. We're not one just one personality type, it's more like density distributions. We have all the different types within us, we just vary in how often we express them. To change is just shifting those distributions in very tiny amounts. Quite subtle shifts in the distribution of your behavior profile in life.

 Pedantic Repetive bit about suppressing vs processing emotions and logic
 Research on Alexithymics (people who struggle with recognizing emotion) finds evidence the VMPFC, amygdala and hippocampus involved with fear extinction. What we can extrapolate from this is, when people have fear responses or any emotion for that matter, you can have parts of your brain that are kind of inhibiting the expression of those emotions, trying to suppress the emotions from happening. For alexithymics, this happens readily. They don't feel emotion, despite there being emotional circuits that are active because those circuits are being inhibited from presenting in a particular way. Another group this happens a lot for, are those that rely on argumentation or logical thinking. (By the way, often, people think they're being logical and not emotional. But ironically these "logical" people might actually be being emotional because what can happen is that due to reciprocal inhibition, even though we're trying to inhibit the emotional circuit, that circuit can activate and shape our rational thinking. Leading to a bunch of thought processes that justify the emotion, and once they're in that mode there's nothing you can say to prove them wrong. In this state, they just cannot realize that just because your logic is sound, it does not mean you are right. [The less emotion you are able to feel, the more likely your rational thinking is actually hijacked by your emotions.] A good way to test this to see if it is happening is is to tell them their logic is wrong. "The logical chain you are outlining is incorrect" or something like that. For people that feel really strongly about their argumentation you will see the emotion come out, all the defensive mechanisms get put on display, creating all sorts of logic-backed irrationalizations. If they don't feel strongly about it, they'll probably continue arguing as is or just leave it alone [because the awareness of their own emotional state gives them the power to choose how they respond].) There isn't really good studies on this, but you have to wonder where those all that suppressed emotional energy go? This must have a minor role in contributing towards the autoimmune conditionssuch as fibromyalgia. Perhaps a part of autoimmunity is a way of expressing the pent up energy that was inhibited from being expressed. Not to say I'm advocating for catharsis (usually that feeds the beast more), but there might be good physical reasons for taking time to digest your emotions rather than just tucking them away under the carpet. I think at some point people will realise there is no division between mind and body. It's just mind-body. Because even on the opposite end: Once again, there isn't really good studies on this, but if someone uses emotions to repress their thoughts, where does all that mental energy go? I have to imagine that the thought suppression has a minor role in mental pacing conditions such as anxiety. Logic and emotion are recriprocally inhibitory circuits. There is good reason to suppress them because the situation may call for the expression of one over the other. But recognize, each fight with the self, each suppression, adds up bottled energy that may dangerously pop like champange. If there isn't an immediate need to suppress, let the emotions and thoughts run their course. Don't respond by adding more emotion and thoughts. Just watch them come up, acknowledge their existence, tolerate their existence, and then move on. Sit with the emotions, Let them pass through you, as long as it takes.
 Gain emotional awareness. A rational thinker, is the person that acknowledges their emotion, but now that they have that awareness they can act in spite of it if they so choose to. Rather than listening to the mind-body and whatever rationalizations it comes up with. Not to say it's wrong to listen to your rationalizations, they are logical. Your rational circuitry is never wrong but it is selective. It's incomplete. Because blaming the universe or whatever arguments you come up with is an awesome way to give a pass to yourself. This rejection of the world is an awesome way to procrastinate, or avoid responsibility, or protect yourself from shame or whatever else because then it's not your fault. Which is fair, but it doesn't change what you got to do. You can choose to be a slave to your rationalizations and shove your responsibilities onto the world, or you can actually take ownership of your responsibilities. Accept responsibility for your situation, because if you accept responsibility then you also have the power to control it. If other things are to blame, you can't change it. You can try but it's not going to work. So, rather than obeying your brain's emotion hijacking your skill of argument to come up with a logical response that other people aren't able to argue against, instead, practice catching how you feel when the emotions or thoughts come up. Bringing them to light, makes it so that they're no longer seceretly working behind the scenes to manipulate your behavior (and ultimately feeding a negative self image since the goal of rationalizing is to support whatever you feel. And if you're propogating a toxic relationship, it's because you are are reinforcing the way you familiarly feel about yourself.) Since it's uncovered, you can acknowledge them, digest them, and then direct your attention to what you got to do, do what matters to you. Or if you're interacting with someone else, you have to with them as a team, acknowledge the emotion first before talking logically with them.
 The solution here and for most things related to the mind is just awareness. All you need is awareness. Start with awareness. Whatever it is that you feel, breathe into it and breath out of it. As a product of our society, we come to conclusions logically. But when it comes to changing who you are, it is more useful to rely on subjectivity and experience rather than logic. When it comes to changing who you are, be skeptical on whether you should value objectivity and logic over subjectivity. Because in my experience, things can be logically correct or incorrect but that doesn't get people to change. Like, there's no logical doubt that smoking two packs of cigarettes is an awful choice. People knowing that doesn't stop it from happening, because logic doesn't change what experiences their mind is creating for them, and in fact it might even make things worse if they use the objectivity to beat themselves up mentally. Therfore, no body can tell you what to do. We can give advice, but to make change you will first need to develop awareness of the effects your mind has on your subjectivity and expreience. To lean less on objectivity and lean more on subjectivity. Most of what we experience happens in the mind. In the case of hallucinations, it doesn't matter if ghosts aren't real, they really experienced those ghosts. The mental phenomenon you may be experiencing, love, hate, rejection, shame, or whatever, these things that exist in the mind. If you spend all your time within your mind, then your mind is going to shape your entire view of yourself and the universe. Your reality gets shaped by the conclusions within your mind. As you step outside of your mind, you start to become more receptive, and therefore bring in information, and data that is "not" coming from the mental activity. In turn, the very same exact event may lead to two extremely different subjective experiences for you, depending ony our relation to your mind. And the more subjectivity and experiental phenomenon you witness outside of your mind, the more you start developing mental processes other than the ones that's been holding you down. 
 I'm going to repeat what I typed just now, again. A lot of our felt reality is constructed by ideas of the mind. Even your identity, is an abstraction, that has truth to it, because it is a shared delusion we kind of agree on. Identity is a simplification for our understanding. But nonetheless identity is not a real thing. You can't biopsy me or you and find "student" or whatever other identity we hold. The more time we spend outside our mind, the more we start to have experiences that transcend our identity, that transcend the reality created by our mental activity. Changing your relationship to your mind literally is the only powerful leverage you have for changing how you experience things. Because you can't change what your mind produces. The mind works in mysterious ways. So much subconscious phenomenon happen before it comes up to the conscious. But we can change how we relate to what comes up to the conscious. We can't change the felt reality the mental activity generates, but by developing this distance from your mental activity, we can start to be receptive to new subjectivity, to new information and data that will adjust the flavor of our felt reality. As we spend more time outside our mind, we generally start to move in the direction of growing and cultivating good things, things like, tend to feel a little bit happier, get less caught up in stuff, sometimes it's easier to focus, you get less distracted. So, how do you go about changing your relation to your mind? Well don't worry about changing it, that's the second step and more times than not is a byproduct of the actual one and only step to take. Which is to gain awareness. As you gain awareness of how your mind functions, and gain full awareness of how your current emotional state has on your rational thinking, and can proceed without ego (that is, you can make decisions based on your dharma rather than your identity,) then you can start to trust your logical thinking, because you've created a conscious distance between you and the effects your mind has on you. You can further supplement this with things like, understanding where these processes of your mind started to develop, perhaps there was some event or series of events that lead you to form your logical conclusions and defense mechanisms. Mental processes that may trigger in the face of current events, but with that self-knowledge it helps provide opportunity to be aware of how appropriate your mind's creations are to the current situation or if they're just adaptive reflexes you've developed that are now serving you maladaptively. Any self-searching, or any activity that will help you develop an awareness of your inner workings, and create distance between you and your inner workings, this is what will allow you to start being inquisitive, curious, experimental, and playful and all the other types of present-action-oriented-modes of being that allow you to start considering change. It doesn't have to be some sort of spiritual journey or meditation regime, it can be something as simple as working out. Noticing the sensations you experience from doing it. Breathing into those sensations and breathing out of those sensations. Awareness can be practiced in many different ways, and it is contagious, it will spread through all the other areas of your life because awareness is a way of being that unlike logic and facts actually changes your subjective experience. I'm sure you've heard facts don't care about feelings. Well, feelings don't care about facts. So, to address feeling, you do feeling. 

 A note on Emotional Empathy
 There's a hypothesis out there that if you are tuned out of the range of your own internal experience, then you will have trouble picking that up in other people. (of course you could still have cognitive empathy.) You might have an intuition that someone who practices isolated meditation might make you selfish, might make you disconnected from people when you get out of it, since you've been focused on your own thoughts for so long it might make you like more awkward. But my money is on the idea that tuning more into your own emotion might help you be more empathic. And indeed there's decent research that indicates that those who are more self-compassionate (which generally goes hand-in-hand with increased interoception although it doesn't have to be the case) tend to take things less personally and tend to have a reduced sense of separate self (a reduced feeling of isolation, and therefore also reducing the most powerful contributur to psychopathology, and therefore more likely to feel a sense of connectedness), and also are more likely to have a felt sense that it is both true that each individual is unique and precious and yet we are all part of this larger whole, this common humanity, a shared human experience where we have more things in common than we do in difference, and facing this sense of commonality and interconnection while still appreciating and not belittling individual eccentricities. And research also finds that people that are self-compassionate are more likely to compromise in interpersonal situations in a way that neither subordinate nor priotize their own need, and this balance leads to more voice, more authenticity, more relational well-being. And as for what self-compassion is? Self-compassion is really being familiar with understanding what you need to alleviate your suffering, what you need to be well. To address this, I'm just pointing out that self-care and emotional empathy, (that is, developing this element of tenderness both for you and for others,) goes hand-in-hand with leveling up your soul. Being enlightened is self-compassion. Self-compassion is you tenderly dancing with acceptance and change simultaneously. It is the difference between 1) beating yourself up to improve because you feel inadequate, rushing your growth so much that it causes you trauma because you are impatient with yourself, and inadvertently tuning yourself out of the range of your internal experience as you selfishly fight to suppress your feeling of inadequacy, and 2) feeling a need to improve because you care about other people and you care about you and want to be healthy, a feeling that results from developing the intimacy and tenderness of your relationship with your self. The difference between a shame-full guilt and a shame-free guilt. This shame-free guilt is why an interoceptive acceptance is systemetically tied to taking responsibility and developing emotional empathy. If you aren't taking responsibility, you are by definition not being self-compassionate nor compassionate. Taking responsibility out of shame is selfish love, that is, relieving pain (out of instinct). Being shame-free comes hand in hand with having choice, having autonomy in how you decide to take responsibility. 
 There are good studies that show when we know someone pretty well and they are going through some sort of experience of any kind, our heart rate, and breathing starts to mimic theirs even if we aren't consciosu of their breathing. Somehow, human beings are able to register the internal state of other beings, and probably animals too. Even from a distance. Indicating that at least in this perspective, your sense of internal landscape is linked to others. You, yourself, can try enhancing your ability to get a better readout for how you feel, for your internal state, and likely therefore for how others feel by learning to sense your heartbeats without taking your pulse. When you stop taking in exteroceptive information from the outside world by focusing inward by doing things such as closing your eyes, you start paying attention to your beathing caddence, your heart rate. And if you start to perceive your heart beating, you actually very quickly strengthen the vagal connections (the communication network) between the brain and body. Just by doing this a minute or so every once in a while, you will likely start to tapping into this sixth sense. In turn, (serving as the fourth most important ingredient for, well unless you're already quite spiritual than movement will be more important for) greatly increasing the synchrony of your organs. 

 What are these things we call Emotions? 
 Interoception, your sense of your internal self, is an amalgation of internal feelings. The vagus nerve, the communication and motor system that is connected to basically every organ, is responsible for emotion because it aggregates the conditions of your gut, your heart, your breathing, and takes the collection of information to the brain, which controls your emotions. Whatever it is that bothers you, you think of generally as a purely cognitive event but (although your interpretation of the information does matter because if you're tired and want to sleep that feels good but if you're tired and need to be awake that feels bad, but) the brain doesn't really know what to do with that information. It doesn't act directly on that information to create moods. Moods are created through the heart's response to reading that headline, to the change in your breathing in response to someone not interested in spending time with you anymore. Your sense of self, your interoception, built from things like gut chemistry, immune systems, spleens, other organs. All of those things are plugging in like ingredients in a recipe that give rise to your mood and how you feel. When bad stress occurs, it does not mess up the gut, but what it does is shuts down the vagus nerve, which essentially serves as the communication network between the brain and body. Stress doesn't let your gut get signals to the brain, which throws off the chemistry of your gut and leads to a cascade of effects in your body. Disrupting your gut, making you feel not good, poor digestion and lousy, just because the neurons that communicate from gut to brain are quieted now, just because your sense of interoception has been hampered. This is shown in one location in your body that other people can see, your facial expression. Your face, size of your pupils, the tonality, how flushed or pale you are, the degree to which you are frowning or smiling relative ot other periods, are all an aggregate, a reflection of your gut, your heart and your breathing and chemistry of your body. 
 (As a side note, 1-5  tablespoons of fermented food daily goes a long way for the gut as it promotes microbiota diversity (not because it's a probiotic! We don't want excessive mircobiota. Many problematic microbiota prefer alkaline environments and in themselves promote alkalinity in the mucosal lining. This can lead to things like leaky gut and acid reflux! Some people try to increase alkaline foods (or water) in response but usually this has a null effect on mucosal lining acidity. The main mechanism for hampering these auto-immune effects, counter to common sense, is to rather than aiming to decrease acidity, is to increase acidity levels by way of fermented foods. Consider starting with a high fiber diet first, as fiber is a great way to get rid of microbiota. Fasting is another great way to get rid of microbiota. Then start incorporating fermented foods into your diet.)

 Quick quote reminding you why detachment is valuable, and preluding the relationship between your POV-frame and your level of suffering: “When experiences determine thoughts, desires determine personalities.” ~Lee Hyun-Gul from Gyeoggi 3 Ban. 

 Science's decontextualization of meditation from its Eastern roots is a disservice because you need to know why you are doing meditation. You need to know why you are on the path of enlightenment. There is no talk about Dharma, or duty, which is the main story element that Hindu stories pivot on. Stories told to kids to help them explore the world, to help them align with what truly matters to them and what doesn't matter to them. Dharmas help people make tough decisions, and they help people navigate things in life that could easily be muffled such as Arranged Marriages vs Love Marriages. Most Indians grow up in poverty and in order to survive you will have to participate in an Arranged Marriage that will help you fulfill your community's needs. However, these are often loveless marriages, so often when their needs are met, people now have the luxury to engage with their desires/wants. The Hindu stories are there to help listeners find their own value. Dharmas are constantly evolving, and they are given to you by the world. Your karma determines your Dharma. That is, your particular set of stats, plus your particular situation, the combination of those two will help you figure out what to value, and what to focus on. Because not all values are worthy to be devoteful to, to be dutiful about. If the values come from the sense organ than it is a desire, and not a dharma. Desires aren't evil but values is where motivation comes from. Dharmas are things you do for the sake of doing the task. Desires are when you do something for the sake of some other thing that is (related but) separate from what you are doing. Dharmas are things you pursue even in the face of negative emotion. For example, if someone pointed a gun at you, would you avoid the bullet or embrace it. Compare that to if someone pointed a gun at your child, would you avoid the bullet or embrace it. Desires are values that can easily be corrupted by Ego, comparison (unless dispassionate comparison), and expectation. Desires are especially destructive when your mana bar is low because our mind feeds us the worst kinds of information when we are the most vulnerable (bad emotion opens you up to feeding your Ego.) Desires are vulnerable to being deviated from, all it takes is a subtle thought, a mere possibility, not even an active decision on your part, and you may start deviating from working towards your desire. Eating delicious food is a want that cannot be self-sustained, but mastering the art of cooking could be your duty, something worth working on for its own sake, given you have a circumstance that allows you to do so. Not to say that a dharma is a soul pursuit, it's not something you strive to complete, it's something you put your honest best effort to do. Dharma is about a direction, not a destination. Dharma shows up when you're ready. The world tells you its needs (a recognition of a need to be filled.) There are people out there that would be greatly benefited from enjoying your cooking, and you're the one who has honed their cooking skills, so it is your duty to do it. This is a task meant for you to do. Dharma is about the next step as opposed to the last step. The most important step you can take is the next step, not the step after that one, just the next step. Without a direction though, you're just wandering. Although your dharma might be to find your dharma. To work on yourself. To do things for the sake of doing it for you. To find out more about you. To hone skills. Maybe you feel that your life's purpose is to help others, that this is the thing your soul pursues, but that cannot be your current duty if you aren't ready for it. If helping others hinders/hurts your future ability to help others more than it helps, then chances are your dharma right now is not to help others but to work on yourself. Dharma is putting your best effort to doing what you can do now in the direction of a self-sustaining value. What your dharma is will evolve over time, as determined by your stats and your circumstance. Build yourself an interesting kharmic background so that when a particular dharma emerges you will be prepared. “The right partner is not something you find it is something you become.” ~Dr. K. The essence of dharma is to live a life that is Authentic, Paying-Attention, and Value-Driven by looking at what's around you and experiemting with it, wholesomely tweaking your environment (internal and external.) What can you do today that is of playful service towards your dharma? This is how we create a supportive environment. It is not guaranteed, but there is a strong element of reciprocity there. A weakening connection between you and the world, because you are supporting the world and it starts to support you in a way that feels very fluid. And likewise, you support yourself in a way that also supports the world in a way that feels natural and wholesome. Once again, this is your duty, being authentic, paying attention, and value-driven.

 "I suck at meditation, it isn't for me." Who is the path of meditation for? I would keep in mind that a meditative practice that is good for you, is a practice that would be easy (as in, simple to do/not complex) & challenging (as in, it grabs sufficient amount of your attention.) There is a meditative practice suitable for every individual. If you find you struggle with meditation, it isn't because meditation isn't for you, it's because you haven't found a good meditation for you. Not to say that that you are going to enjoy doing meditation (even if you were "good" at it.) Not to say you'll level up your spirituality just by doing meditation either. Just saying that a good meditative practice should come easy (& challenging) to you. Not to say you should practice meditation either. At the same time though, it is your effort to try to be good is what creates the sense of incapability. Let that go. Enlightenment is not for everyone. There is no 1, no singular, standard for all people. Meeting where you at is important. If you're at a place where you're looking to grow spiritually, then go ahead and embark on this journey. Like, don't go on the path of meditation just to reach some idea of enlightenment. The path should make sense to you. On this path, you should see that this is an area of your life where you have room to work on, you should see that this area of your life is currently appropriate for you to work on (like it wouldn't make sense to do this if you're in a war or something), and you should see that this is an area of your life that your willing to put a large portion of your meaning, attention and focus towards. Like, it has to align with you in some way. Like, meditation is something that has a 100% efficacy rate, the issue here is compliance is the most important thing here. It doesn't matter how good meditation is if it doesn't make sense for you to do it. It should align with you in some way, to fulfill something for you. It is a tool for honing your ability to exert influence, to put your best foot forward, towards a particular direction. Not to be confused with actually successfuly influencing the world with your attempts. Meditation isn't for cultivating success. In fact, meditation will likely inhibit many of the adaptive processes you have developed to interact with the world. However, you may think that may inhibit your success because meditation is about detaching from ideas of success. But often detaching from success is when people become the most successful. Meditation is for cultivating your ability to put your best foot forward, and whether that leads to success or not is a different story. You don't have to be successful at meditation to do meditation. Of course, for many people that would mean they're not going to do it. And that's okay. Intentional deliberate change is likely impossible if you do not want to change. If you do not have insight on something you would want to change, that's a hurdle in itself that is very hard to work through. Meet yourself where you're at. A good meditation practice for you will be both easy & challenging. If you aren't up for the challenge, then that's okay. If you haven't found a meditative practice that comes easy for you...Well now...finding a good meditative practice for you, (although there is certainly one that exists for you,) the world isn't equipped to do such a thing. As I mentioned before, both eastern and western meditation experts have issues, so what's out there right now is not that good. And that's okay, you don't have to be good at something, just to do it. Right? It still aligns with one focus of meditation, which is to make the best out of the hand that has been dealt to you. Like, think about how silly the world would be if the only people that were allowed to play basketball were people who had the potential to join the NBA. You can still play basketball, even if you suck at it. It may feel bad to suck at it, at the same time that doesn't mean you can't be content and appreciate how playing basketball feels and how playing basketball makes you feel. Remember, contentness and suffering are on separate axes from emotion. You can appreciate the layers of beauty that arise with emotions, regardless of whether those emotions are positive and/or negative. So, if it is an appropriate and opportune time for you to play basketball and/or practice meditation, then do it. Do it and fail (or succeed) magnificently. And if you're not in a place where it makes sense to play basketball and/or practice meditation, then that's okay, don't do it. Be sensible here. Play & toy with it. If you suck at it and do it, then when you do it: Do it, knowing that it may never work, that it will never work. It's going to suck, it's not going to amount to anything. The better you get at noticing that the meditation sucks, and it's not doing anything for you-that's the whole point-the better you'll get at it. Do it, and as the futility arises, look at it, see it. Be reasonable here, experiment with it. When you practice meditation, the most important thing is to meet yourself where you are. Meet yourself at the only place you can be. Don't expect to find yourself where you are not. Notice where you are. Be here, not there. There is no there, there.

 Meditation vs Enlightenment. Now of course, meditation practice is tied to spiritual growth, and enlightenment is used as a way to proxy how spiritual growth looks like, but recognize that meditation practice in itself is not something you need to do, and it is not something that is for everyone. 1) The path of enlightenment does not make sense for everyone's situation. There are many evolutionary adaptive processes that are tied to one's success, and whether or not it is the right time to re-evaluate those processes is up to you. It's your choice as to whether you want to change or not, and are ready to change. 2) Meditation practice may be tied in its relation to improving your ability to be Enlightened, but they're two completely separate things. Enlightenment is a lot simpler than meditation, it is something you just "be", and it is something that you can be without meditation practice. Meditation is just doing something in particular, that has a chance at producing an enlightened state. It is an imitation, it is something you do to approximate enlightenment. However, to be enlightened you don't need to do anything in particular, you just be it. This is why Buddha laughed when he reached enlightenment because he realized all of those meditative practices and other endeavors he embarked were a waste of time (in terms of enlightenment) when in reality it was something so simple. Something that is hard to describe, perhaps impossible to describe, but yet so simple.

 Clarification on what Self-Transcendence means - Rather than transcendence it might be better described as descendence. As Abraham Maslow put it, "I think of the self-actualizing man not as an ordinary man with something added, but rather an ordinary man with nothing taken away." Because the process of becoming self-transcendent is really a process of waking in, of descending and tuning in to your internal self. Nothing needs to be removed or taken away. The only change is a shift in your view. It becomes less about what's here, but what is arising to. And what arises to is variable and temporary. The reason we call it Transcendence is that this process of internal descendence, of internal realization, usually leads to people having an increased connection to all things not them, whether it be their work, or other people, or nature, or whatever. And not always, but usually self-transcendent people are also more likely to impact the world positively, not just themself. The best way to think of transcendece is like a ship. Usually for the hull of the boat, they have a sense of security. Safety (a sense of secure attachment) makes up foundation of the hull. The rest of security comprises of connection (a sense of community but also a feeling of community humanity where we try to understand), and  self-esteem (healthy positive esteem where you feel worthy in a non narcissistic way, aka confidence). When the hull is secured [with safety, connection and self-esteem] we are not driven by fear anymore, so now we're ready to open the sail and to move with the spirit of exploration. The sail/mast of the boat represents growth, with exploration as its foundation. Intellectual curiosity, cognitive exploration, etc... The rest of the sail is Be love/Being love (love for the being of others, of everyone you meet, rather than being the receiver of love) and need for purpose (clear vision of where you are going, even if you are far away and know there will be a lot of setbacks/unknowns.) So, when people feel secure with safety, connection, and self-esteem, (their personality changes) they become more likely to grow via exploring, being love, and working towards a purpose. The process of self-transcendence is the process of giving yourself the power to build the ship's hull and sail, and to unlearn the things that get in the way of you building that ship. This process changes your personality traits but also your natural state. That is, you get a more stable sense of self. Which in turn provides a point of view that makes you more likely to be open to experience, to have newness of appreciation (to be able to have gratitude for what you see over and over, awaking to the newness of that), and other things similar to awe. In another view, self-transcendence is when you reach a point where your competence is so influential and powerful that you impact the world for the better, and because there is so little separation between you and the world you hit a point where what's good for you is also good for the world. 

 Enlightenment vs AI. Enlightenment is just about the felt sense of processing. AI process, but they don't do it with the felt sense.

 Is enlightenment necessary? It isn't necessary, it isn't optional, it is, already. Necessity is a construction of the human mind. It's kind of like saying is gravity necessary? No, gravity isn't necessary, it is just the state of things. In the same way, everyone is already what they are, enlightened. The process of meditation is just improving your ability to recognize your enlightenment, and the way your ego clouds this mystical experience. Meditation is aimed at dissolving your ego, and allowing you to better recognize a state of mindlessness (not to say that the mind won't create thoughts. You still experience sensations like thoughts, identity, and feelings, you're just not attached to them, allowing you to better recognize your sense of self, allowing the observer to become your most constant and grounded sense of self), that is, a state of pure awareness, where the observer actually melds with the observation, a sense of self-transcendence. The reason why this melding happens is because when the ego is dissolved, there is no longer debris that contaminate and weaken the connection between you and your observation. If you've ever experienced awe, which is a form of self-expansiveness that occurs while observing (+ there's an idea out there that awe is a manifestation of our instinct to mimic + an idea out there that open people are able to be more people in a sense), enlightenment is very similar to that sense of awe. A sense that is kind of like a drop of water unifying with a larger body of water. A sense, that you are part of something much bigger than self, where you still have a sense of your true self (the observer), but you dissolve all other parts of self (the ego). Not to say that ego is not true of who you are. It's just that those things are not universally constant and grounded. The things you feel, like thoughts, pain, and emotions, they come and go. Even though these sensations feel like reality, they are just products of the mind, they are not who you really are. You really feel things sure, and it is also true that your feelings are created via mind and body functions. At the same time, Many people struggle in life because they think their mind is an approximation of reality, of the truth. The truth is, just because your mind is (or is not) telling you something, it doesn't mean it is real. The mind is not the knower of truth. Memories warp. My mind is telling me the keys are in the drawer, turns out in reality they're in my jeans. Your expectations only exist until they are met or not met. Your personality evolves. Even your identity is not constant and grounded; You may be a doting parent today, an eye guru tomorrow. Not even adjectives: You can do insightful things, but you can't be insightful, you can't be anything other than you, you can only be you. After you have dissolved all of that which makes up your ego, what's Always there, as long as your consciousness is functioning, is you as the observer. (And if your consciousness ceases to function, that's okay, let it be. Death acceptance is a part of the process.) Being the observer is not about thought or philosophy, not intellectual understanding or growth. It's about experience and once you've experienced, nothing can take that from you. Do the practice and you will change. You can't not change with an experience. Once you've jumped into the ocean in the first time in your life, you can never take away the deep understanding that comes with that experience; the world becomes a different place. Being the observer is about your effort; No outcomes are guaranteed in life, what is guaranteed is the effort you put in. Allow yourself to fail, you are not entitled to any outcomes, what you are entitled to is your effort. The path of meditation is one towards enlightenment, and will involve directing your attention towards the most grounded and constant parts of life: The effort you put in, and You as the observer of your experience. 

 Not to say you shouldn't care about other things, it's just that Things that are grounded and constant are also things that are the most fundamental quality of your existence that you can be certain you can always return to, Now. When you work on these two sources of stability, your confidence goes to the MOON because being in touch with your internal sense of stability allows you to face uncertainty. Your self-esteem goes (from normal, I say normal because Scientists find that there is no such thing as low self esteem. There's just a spectrum between uncertain self-esteem and high self-esteem. Often, when people are alluding to low self-esteem it's really referring to a different narcissism-like phenomenon [So if that's you, get yourself checked out by a therapist and do some journaling because that shit will require Hard work to parse through, and having someone who's job is to be a consistent source of perspective-guidance and of hypotheses-to-test-out goes a long way.] Otherwise, For those that aren't confident, it's really about a sense of unease/uncertainty. Anyways, when you work on these two sources of certainty, your self-esteem goes) to the MOON. 

 That is, To do Just as babies do, they start off enlightened, they know nothing except the effort they put in, and what they are experiencing now. It is when their relationship to results starts developing that they lose in touch with enlightenment, that their identity, their ego starts to form. I get pampered when I cry, I must be a "good baby," "what I do matters." Nothing happens when I cry, I must be a "bad baby", "my efforts are futile." Not to say that it is wrong to form an ego, it is an evolutionarily adaptive mechanism. (Imagine if you're trying to learn how to walk as an infant, and instead of blaming yourself for stumbling down and trying to figure out what you did wrong, you blamed your parents for being unable to walk! This is a strong driving force before a lot of your conceptual thinking.) Forming an ego (Forming this self-referencing and self-awareness relationship) helps you make sense of the world as you learn to engage with it, especially during a period of your life where you were only aware of yourself: You didn't really know you have caretakers, it's just that when these people were around you just knew you got cared for (or didn't). The way your ego formed is directly tied to how you learned about the statistical properities of the world. The ego's function is a problem solving function, that is, how we identify with problems (or good situations). What's going on there? What's going on in your body? Is there something I need to be aware of here? Is there some danger there? How should I respond? And as you grow, you acquire more of these Samskaras, these undigested balls of emotions (which provided a process for engaging with the world in an adaptive way). These Samskaras continue to affect us later on in life in sneaky and sometimes in ways we won't catch, because it is not clear whether you are responding in a particular way because it is appropriate to the present context or because the context is triggering a response you learned in the past. Not to mention, these undigested balls of emotion retain the age at which it was formed. That is, a younger person is more likely to form a more potent Samskara because their ability to process emotions isn't as developed. Every time you transition to a particular patterned way of engaging with the world, whether the patterned modes be patterned behaviors, patterned perspectives, or patterned emotional responses, they are all learned somewhere, they had to be taught to you by your experience. Not to say that just because it is patterned, that it will be easy to spot. Unprocessed samskaras will come out in weird ways because If your mind can't process something, your body will (serves as a distraction from mental stressors?) and If your body can't handle something, your mind will. If you have a reason, your body will feel the reasoning. If you have a feeling, your mind will come up with reasons for the feeling. The body and brain doesn't distinguish between physical stress (outside of things like soreness) and mental stress, it's all nervous system. It's just cortisol and adrenaline, there is no special hormone just for physical vs regular stress. There are all types of adaptations our mind/body will do to protect us from feelings we may have. The mind goes to complications and variables, because the mind LOVES complexity. And it can get particularly messy when you have various of these undigested balls of patterns that are compounding, and are (likely) competing (as opposed to coexisting) for expression. Whether your brain formed these connections because they were once adaptive, or because your experiences taught these connections to you, meditation gives you a process of putting these neurochemical connections under scrutiny to see if they still serve a function (and what that function is) or if we should engage the process of letting these connections go, to untangle the messy, to digest the undigested. To feel what feelings are here when there are no problems for those feelings to solve. To just be here with those feelings, but not identify with those learned feelings.

 Meditation provides us six tools to do so: leveling up your ability to detect what your mind and body does, Providing a space to revisit the origin of our adaptations and the impact our previous adaptations has on the now, reframing your relationship to your internal experience, providing a space to digest sensations, doing reps of something that exercise your one directional-focused mind muscle, and leveling up your ability to redirect your attention towards what matters and towards what you can do about it in the now. 

 As your spiritually grows, you will find that your ego, adaptations, and attachments will dissolve, allowing coexistence as opposed to tension in the mind, clearing the way for you to get in touch with your truest sense of self. Thus, freeing you of malware and letting you form a more intimate connection with the things you truly value, and distancing yourself from the things that don't matter, from things that clouded your view. To do things you dislike and to give up things you like, to work towards what you value. And if someone tries to get you to forsake personal responsibility for the sake of spirituality, don't trust them; Spirituality does not absolve you of responsibility: Spirituality redirects you towards your responsibility in a more intimate and enjoyable way. Freeing your consciousness to allow you to access your creative power, that is, unlocking your ability to exert effort on reality, aka personal intention + focused consciousness, aka your ability to sow seeds of karma, aka liberating your mind and enjoying it.

 Now, whether anything I previously said is even remotely true or not, there is good scientific evidence that having an internally consistent way that you view the world is a good way to find peace, happiness, stability, and to build resilience. So, in this way, spending some time thinking about it and coming to your own conclusions about, "What is the way you are viewing your existence?," can be helpful. And meditation offers various prompts as starting points towards exploring your relationship to self.


 **"*Hey Dude, The philosophy is cool, but I need practical advice. Could you kindly provide the steps, plz bro.*"**
Look Buddy, I'm lowkey autistic, looking at the temperament of a person and trying to suggest a meditative practice for you is out of my league. So, instead I'd say, if you've read this and understand the goal of meditation, well even if you didn't read nor understand the goal of meditation and it just sounds too hokey-pokey to be true, this is all you got to know; If you engage in an activity that does one or more of these 6 things, you are on the path of enlightenment: 

1) Levels up your ability to uncover and detect what your mind and body does and feels (awareness/noticing precedes control/diagnosis.) (Going Meta, is basically the only prerequisite for spiritual growth.)  

2) Provides a space to revisit the origin of our learned adaptations and the impact our previous adaptations has on our interactions with the now (because diagnosis precedes treatment) and to explore whether these adaptations have become maladaptation. To gain insight into what type of thoughts and feelings your neurons have been wired to produced. To be able to recognize if what you are feeling is actually relevant to the present or if it's an echoed feeling from the past (that is, the quality/color/flavor of the emotion is similar to something you've felt in the past, because that past feeling is undigested and is a hammer that makes things all look like nails to you.). (To empty out your trashcan you need to know what's in your trashcan.)

3) Reframes your relationship to your internal experience (to one centered around a detached-acceptance of what coexists in the mind "it is what it is", as opposed to fueling a war of supremacy that rejects what's in the mind that convinces you "I shouldn't/should feel that way"). Practices your ability to sit with duality (because things may appear to contradict but in reality, it's both, they coexist). These reframing will help you train yourself to be free from impact by moving away from judgment and appreciating things for what they are by letting impact hit you and then pass through you. This is how detachment is cultivated (detachment fully unlocks your ability to do what matters regardless of what circumstance you are in or what stats you have.)

4) Provides a space to digest sensations in whatever form they may come (thoughts, logic, feelings, emotions, senses, identity, ego, perception, level of energy, spiritual, behavior, visceral, physical, inclination towards adaptations, you name it) (This is valuable because awareness of the thing doesn't stop it from happening. Feeling the thing, and Processing the thing does stop it. Control just puts it away for it to resurface later.) This is how you unwire the wired neurons. (Unload the baggage that weighs you down and clear debuffs by digesting them.)

5) Does reps of something that exercise your one directional-focused mind muscle (think laser-focus not lightbulb-scatter). (This is the main mechanism of any practice the improves your spiritual growth. Being and doing things, now.)

6) Levels up your ability to redirect your attention towards what matters and towards what you can do about it in the now (and detaches you from what "doesn't matter"). (This is what spiritual growth is all about. Fulfilling your duties while simultaneously freeing yourself.)

 And the underlying mechanism of each of these 6 things is that they clear the debris in your mind that weaken your connection to your most unwavering sense of self. Therefore, as you clear debris, you'll get in touch and strengthen your connection with your truest sense of self.

 If you do insist on looking for a meditative practice and not sure where to start. Well I'm not sure either but definitely watch this video first (there isn't much better videos out there.) It is by no means exhaustive of any sort but it's a start. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H37BDUyCEe0

 The money beg: Alternatively, Dr. K is someone who has spent years in the land of the monks and years as a MD, someone who advocates for the meditative practices best supported by science and has found success sharing his meditative practices from Harvard MDs to investment bankers to NFL players to prostitutes to whatever else you can name in Boston. What makes Dr. K special is he is a gamer and is currently targeting youth, who the mental health system seems to have failed. However, Dr. K is only one guy and can’t save the world, so instead he is working on duplicating himself. Right now, he is training coaches (mostly young adult gamers) to have life-changing impact on young adults that have found themselves straggling in life. Dr. K is going to release an interactive meditation guide for $20, which will go directly to the pockets of his coaches, that so far are having statistically significant impact on those being coached (with effect sizes comparable to medication.) The $20 will preorder you access to 5 different paths of actual meditative practices, organized by theme/goal. The 5 paths are Mind, Self/Soul, Happiness/Contentment, Knowledge, Accomplishment. (Note that the price will likely hike up when the guides are actually released.) If you do want Dr. K’s meditation guide, you will need a Discord account to buy it.
https://coaching.healthygamer.gg/guide